---
title: 7.3 Tasking
---

The definition of tasking in the Ada language leaves many
characteristics of the tasking model up to the implementor. This allows
a vendor to make appropriate tradeoffs for the intended application
domain, but it also diminishes the portability of designs and code
employing the tasking features. In some respects, this diminished
portability is an inherent characteristic of concurrency approaches (see
Nissen and Wallis 1984, 37). A discussion of Ada tasking dependencies
when employed in a distributed target environment is beyond the scope of
this book. For example, multiprocessor task scheduling, interprocessor
rendezvous, and the distributed sense of time through package Calendar
are all subject to differences between implementations. For more
information, Nissen and Wallis (1984) and ARTEWG (1986) touch on these
issues, and Volz et al. (1985) is one of many research articles
available.

If the Real-Time Systems Annex is supported, then many concurrency
aspects are fully defined and, therefore, a program can rely on these
features while still being portable to other implementations that
conform to the Real-Time Systems Annex. The following sections provide
guidelines based on the absence of this annex.

### Task Activation Order

#### guideline

- Do not depend on the order in which task objects are activated when
  declared in the same declarative list.

#### rationale

The order in which task objects are activated is left undefined in the
Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยง9.2). See also Guideline 6.1.5.

### Delay Statements

#### guideline

- Do not depend on a particular delay being achievable (Nissen and
  Wallis 1984).
- Never use knowledge of the execution pattern of tasks to achieve
  timing requirements.

#### rationale

The rationale for this appears in Guideline 6.1.7. In addition, the
treatment of delay statements varies from implementation to
implementation, thereby hindering portability.

Using knowledge of the execution pattern of tasks to achieve timing
requirements is nonportable. Ada does not specify the underlying
scheduling algorithm, and there is no guarantee that system clock ticks
will be consistently precise between different systems. Thus, when you
change system clocks, your delay behavior also changes.

### Package Calendar, Type Duration, and System.Tick

#### guideline

- Do not assume a correlation between System.Tick and type Duration
  (see Guidelines 6.1.7 and 7.4.2).

#### rationale

Such a correlation is not required, although it may exist in some
implementations.

### Select Statement Evaluation Order

#### guideline

- Do not depend on the order in which guard conditions are evaluated
  or on the algorithm for choosing among several open select
  alternatives.

#### rationale

The language does not define the order of these conditions, so assume
that they are arbitrary.

### Task Scheduling Algorithm

#### guideline

- Do not assume that tasks execute uninterrupted until they reach a
  synchronization point.
- Use pragma Priority to distinguish general levels of importance only
  (see Guideline 6.1.6).

#### rationale

The Ada tasking model requires that tasks be synchronized only through
the explicit means provided in the language (i.e., rendezvous, task
dependence, pragma Atomic). The scheduling algorithm is not defined by
the language and may vary from time sliced to preemptive priority. Some
implementations provide several choices that a user may select for the
application.

#### notes

The number of priorities may vary between implementations. In addition,
the manner in which tasks of the same priority are handled may vary
between implementations even if the implementations use the same general
scheduling algorithm.

#### exceptions

In real-time systems, it is often necessary to tightly control the
tasking algorithm to obtain the required performance. For example,
avionics systems are frequently driven by cyclic events with limited
asynchronous interruptions. A nonpreemptive tasking model is
traditionally used to obtain the greatest performance in these
applications. Cyclic executives can be programmed in Ada, as can a
progression of scheduling schemes from cyclic through
multiple-frame-rate to full asynchrony (MacLaren 1980), although an
external clock is usually required.

### Abort

#### guideline

- Avoid using the abort statement.

#### rationale

The rationale for this appears in Guideline 6.3.3. In addition,
treatment of the abort statement varies from implementation to
implementation, thereby hindering portability.

### Unprotected Shared Variables and Pragmas Atomic and Volatile

#### guideline

- Do not use unprotected shared variables.
- Consider using protected types to provide data synchronization.
- Have tasks communicate through the rendezvous mechanism.
- Do not use unprotected shared variables as a task synchronization
  device.
- Consider using protected objects to encapsulate shared data.
- Use pragma Atomic or Volatile only when you are forced to by
  run-time system deficiencies.

#### example

See Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.1.2.

#### rationale

The rationale for this appears in Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.2.4. In
addition, the treatment of unprotected shared variables varies from
implementation to implementation, thereby hindering portability.
