---
title: 7.4 Exceptions
---

You should exercise care when using predefined exceptions because
aspects of their treatment may vary between implementations.
Implementation-specific exceptions must, of course, be avoided. See
Guidelines 4.3 an 5.8 for further information on exceptions. See
Guideline 7.1.6 for further information on vendor-supplied features.

### Predefined and User-Defined Exceptions

#### guideline

- Do not depend on the exact locations at which predefined exceptions
  are raised.
- Do not rely on the behavior of Ada.Exceptions beyond the minimum
  defined in the language.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยง11) states that, among implementations,
a predefined exception for the same cause may be raised from different
locations. You will not be able to discriminate between the exceptions.
Further, each of the predefined exceptions is associated with a variety
of conditions. Any exception handler written for a predefined exception
must be prepared to deal with any of these conditions.

Guideline 5.6.9 discusses the use of blocks to define local exception
handlers that can catch exceptions close to their point of origin.

### Implementation-Specific Exceptions

#### guideline

- Do not raise implementation-specific exceptions.
- Convert implementation-specific exceptions within interface packages
  to visible user-defined exceptions.

#### rationale

No exception defined specifically by an implementation can be guaranteed
to be portable to other implementations whether or not they are from the
same vendor. Not only may the names be different, but the range of
conditions triggering the exceptions may be different also.

If you create interface packages for the implementation-specific
portions of your program, those packages can catch or recognize
implementation-specific exceptions and convert them into user-defined
exceptions that have been declared in the specification. Do not allow
yourself to be forced to find and change the name of every handler you
have written for these exceptions when the program is ported.
