---
title: 7.5 Representation Clauses And Implementation-Dependent Features
---

Ada provides many implementation-dependent features that permit greater
control over and interaction with the underlying hardware architecture
than is normally provided by a high-order language. These mechanisms are
intended to assist in systems programming and real-time programming to
obtain greater efficiency (e.g., specific size and layout of variables
through representation clauses) and direct hardware interaction (e.g.,
interrupt entries) without having to resort to assembly level
programming. Given the objectives for these features, it is not
surprising that you must usually pay a significant price in portability
to use them. In general, where portability is the main objective, do not
use these features. When you must use these features, encapsulate them
in packages that are well-commented as interfacing to the particular
target environment. This section identifies the various features and
their recommended use with respect to portability.

### Representation Clauses

#### guideline

- Use algorithms that do not depend on the representation of the data
  and, therefore, do not need representation clauses.
- Consider using representation clauses when accessing or defining
  interface data or when a specific representation is needed to
  implement a design.
- Do not assume that sharing source files between programs guarantees
  the same representation of data types in those files.

#### rationale

In many cases, it is easy to use representation clauses to implement an
algorithm, even when it is not necessary. There is also a tendency to
document the original programmer's assumptions about the representation
for future reference. But there is no guarantee that another
implementation will support the representation chosen. Unnecessary
representation clauses also confuse porting or maintenance efforts,
which must assume that the programmer depends on the documented
representation.

Interfaces to external systems and devices are the most common
situations where a representation clause is needed. Uses of pragma
Import and address clauses should be evaluated during design and porting
to determine whether a representation clause is needed.

Without representation clauses, the language does not require two
compilations of an unchanged file to result in the same data
representation. Things that can change the representation between
compilations include:

- A change in a file earlier in the compilation order
- A change in the optimization strategy or level
- A change in versions of the compiler
- A change in actual compilers
- A change in the availability of system resources

Therefore, two independently linked programs or partitions should only
share data that has their representations explicitly controlled.

#### notes

During a porting effort, all representation clauses can be evaluated as
either design artifacts or specifications for accessing interface data
that might change with a new implementation.

### Package System

#### guideline

- Avoid using package System constants except in attempting to
  generalize other machine-dependent constructs.

#### rationale

Because the values in this package are implementation-provided,
unexpected effects can result from their use.

#### notes

If you must guarantee that physical record layouts will remain the same
between implementations, you can express record fields by their first
and last bit positions as shown in the Ada Reference Manual (1995,
ยง13.5.1). Static expressions and named numbers should be used to let
the compiler compute the endpoints of each range in terms of earlier
fields. In this case, greater portability can be achieved by using
System.Storage_Unit to let the compiler compute the value of the named
number. However, this method might not work for all values of
System.Storage_Unit.

#### exceptions

Do use package System constants to parameterize other
implementation-dependent features (see Pappas (1985, ยง13.7.1).

### Machine Code Inserts

#### guideline

- Avoid machine code inserts.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, Annex C) suggests that the package that
implements machine code inserts is optional. Additionally, it is not
standardized so that machine code inserts are most likely not portable.
In fact, it is possible that two different vendors' syntax will differ
for an identical target, and differences in lower-level details, such as
register conventions, will hinder portability.

#### exceptions

If machine code inserts must be used to meet another project
requirement, recognize and document the portability decreasing effects.

In the declarative region of the body of the routine where machine code
inserts are being used, insert comments explaining what functions
inserts provide and (especially) why the inserts are necessary. Comment
the necessity of using machine code inserts by delineating what went
wrong with attempts to use other higher level constructs.

### Interfacing to Foreign Languages

#### guideline

- Use the package Interfaces and its language-defined child packages
  rather than implementation-specific mechanisms.
- Consider using pragma Import rather than access-to-subprogram types
  for interfacing to subprograms in other languages. (Preferably using
  the "External_Name =\>" argument.)
- Isolate all subprograms employing pragmas Import, Export, and
  Convention to implementation-specific (interface) package bodies.

#### example

This example shows how to interface with the following cube root
function written in C:

```c
double cbrt (double x);
```

```ada
package Math_Utilities is

   Argument_Error : exception;

   function Cube_Root (X : Float) return Float;

   ...

end Math_Utilities;

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
with Interfaces.C;
package body Math_Utilities is

   function Cube_Root (X : Float) return Float is

      function C_Cbrt (X : Interfaces.C.Double) return Interfaces.C.Double;
      pragma Import (Convention    => C,
                     Entity        => C_Cbrt,
                     External_Name => "cbrt");

   begin
      if X < 0.0 then
         raise Argument_Error;
      else
         return Float (C_Cbrt (Interfaces.C.Double (X)));
      end if;
   end Cube_Root;

   ...

end Math_Utilities;
```

#### rationale

For static interfacing to subprograms in other languages, the pragma
Import provides a better solution than access to subprograms because no
indirection is required. The pragma Interface (Ada Reference Manual 1983) has been replaced by pragmas Import, Export, and Convention. Annex
B of the Rationale (1995) discusses how to use these pragmas in
conjunction with the access-to-subprogram types in interfacing to other
languages.

Note especially the distinction between the "External_Name =\>" and
"Link_Name =\>" parameters to pragma Import which are frequently
confused. External_Name specifies the procedure name as it appears in
the source code of the other language (such as C or Fortran). Link_Name
specifies the name used by the linker. Typically, only one of these
parameters is specified, and generally External_Name is the preferred
choice for portability.

Access to subprogram types is useful for implementing callbacks in a
separate subsystem, such as the X Window system.

The problems with interfacing to foreign languages are complex. These
problems include pragma syntax differences, conventions for
linking/binding Ada to other languages, and mapping Ada variables to
foreign language variables. By hiding these dependencies within
interface packages, the amount of code modification can be reduced.

#### exceptions

It is often necessary to interact with other languages, if only an
assembly language, to reach certain hardware features. In these cases,
clearly comment the requirements and limitations of the interface and
pragma Import, Export, and Conventions usage.

### Implementation-Specific Pragmas and Attributes

#### guideline

- Avoid pragmas and attributes added by the compiler implementor.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995) permits an implementor to add pragmas
and attributes to exploit a particular hardware architecture or software
environment. These are obviously even more implementation-specific and
therefore less portable than an implementor's interpretations of the
predefined pragmas and attributes. However, the Ada Reference Manual
(1995) defines a set of annexes that have a uniform and consistent
approach to certain specialized needs, namely, real-time systems,
distributed systems, information systems, numerics, interfacing to
foreign languages, and safety and security. You should always prefer the
facilities defined in the annexes to any vendor-defined pragmas and
attributes.

### Unchecked Deallocation

#### guideline

- Avoid dependence on Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation (see Guideline
  5.9.2).

#### rationale

The unchecked storage deallocation mechanism is one method for
overriding the default time at which allocated storage is reclaimed. The
earliest default time is when an object is no longer accessible, for
example, when control leaves the scope where an access type was declared
(the exact point after this time is implementation-dependent). Any
unchecked deallocation of storage performed prior to this may result in
an erroneous Ada program if an attempt is made to access the object.

This guideline is stronger than Guideline 5.9.2 because of the extreme
dependence on the implementation of Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation. Using
it could cause considerable difficulty with portability.

#### notes

Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation is a supported feature in all Ada
implementations. The portability issue arises in that unchecked storage
deallocations might cause varying results in different implementations.

#### exceptions

Using unchecked deallocation of storage can be beneficial in local
control of highly iterative or recursive algorithms where available
storage may be exceeded.

### Unchecked Access

#### guideline

- Avoid dependence on the attribute Unchecked_Access (see Guideline
  5.9.2).

#### rationale

Access values are subject to accessibility restrictions. Using the
attribute Unchecked_Access prevents these rules from being checked, and
the programmer runs the risk of having dangling references.

### Unchecked Conversion

#### guideline

- Avoid dependence on Ada.Unchecked_Conversion (see Guideline 5.9.1).

#### rationale

The unchecked type conversion mechanism is, in effect, a means of
bypassing the strong typing facilities in Ada. An implementation is free
to limit the types that may be matched and the results that occur when
object sizes differ.

#### exceptions

Unchecked type conversion is useful in implementation-dependent parts of
Ada programs where lack of portability is isolated and where low-level
programming and foreign language interfacing are the objectives.

If an enumeration representation clause is used, unchecked type
conversion is the only language-provided way to retrieve the internal
integer code of an enumeration value.

### Run-Time Dependencies

#### guideline

- Avoid the direct invocation of or implicit dependence upon an
  underlying host operating system or Ada run-time support system,
  except where the interface is explicitly defined in the language
  (e.g., Annex C or D of the Ada Reference Manual \[1995\]).
- Use standard bindings and the package Ada.Command_Line when you
  need to invoke the underlying run-time support system.
- Use features defined in the Annexes rather than vendor-defined
  features.

#### rationale

Features of an implementation not specified in the Ada Reference Manual
(1995) will usually differ between implementations. Specific
implementation-dependent features are not likely to be provided in other
implementations. In addition to the mandatory predefined language
environment, the annexes define various packages, attributes, and
pragmas to standardize implementation-dependent features for several
specialized domains. You enhance portability when you use the features
declared in the packages in the Annexes because you can port your
program to other vendor environments that implement the same Annexes you
have used. Even if a majority of vendors eventually provide similar
features, they are unlikely to have identical formulations. Indeed,
different vendors may use the same formulation for (semantically)
entirely different features.

When coding, try to avoid depending on the underlying operating system.
Consider the consequences of including system calls in a program on a
host development system. If these calls are not flagged for removal and
replacement, the program could go through development and testing only
to be unusable when moved to a target environment that lacks the
facilities provided by those system calls on the host.

Guideline 7.1.5 discusses the use of the package Ada.Command_Line. If
an Ada environment implements a standard binding to operating system
services, such as POSIX/Ada, and you write POSIX-compliant calls, your
program should be portable across more systems.

#### exceptions

In real-time, embedded systems, making calls to low-level support system
facilities may often be unavoidable. Isolating the uses of these
facilities may be too difficult. Comment them as you would machine code
inserts (see Guideline 7.6.3); they are, in a sense, instructions for
the virtual machine provided by the support system. When isolating the
uses of these features, provide an interface for the rest of your
program to use, which can be ported through replacement of the
interface's implementation.
