---
title: 7.6 Input/Output
---

I/O facilities in Ada are not a part of the syntactic definition of the
language. The constructs in the language have been used to define a set
of packages for this purpose. These packages are not expected to meet
all the I/O needs of all applications, in particular, embedded systems.
They serve as a core subset that may be used on straightforward data and
that can be used as examples of building I/O facilities upon the
low-level constructs provided by the language. Providing an I/O
definition that could meet the requirements of all applications and
integrate with the many existing operating systems would result in
unacceptable implementation dependencies. The types of portability
problems encountered with I/O tend to be different for applications
running with a host operating system versus embedded targets where the
Ada run-time is self-sufficient. Interacting with a host operating
system offers the added complexity of coexisting with the host file
system structures (e.g., hierarchical directories), access methods
(e.g., indexed sequential access method \[ISAM\]), and naming
conventions (e.g., logical names and aliases based on the current
directory). The section on Input/Output in ARTEWG (1986) provides some
examples of this kind of dependency. Embedded applications have
different dependencies that often tie them to the low-level details of
their hardware devices.

The major defense against these inherent implementation dependencies in
I/O is to try to isolate their functionality in any given application.
The majority of the following guidelines are focused in this direction.

### Name and Form Parameters

#### guideline

- Use constants and variables as symbolic actuals for the Name and
  Form parameters on the predefined I/O packages. Declare and
  initialize them in an implementation dependency package.

#### rationale

The format and allowable values of these parameters on the predefined
I/O packages can vary greatly between implementations. Isolation of
these values facilitates portability. Not specifying a Form string or
using a null value does not guarantee portability because the
implementation is free to specify defaults.

#### notes

It may be desirable to further abstract the I/O facilities by defining
additional Create and Open procedures that hide the visibility of the
Form parameter entirely (see Pappas 1985, 54-55).

### File Closing

#### guideline

- Close all files explicitly.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, §A.7) does not define what happens to
external files after completion of the main subprogram (in particular,
if corresponding files have not been closed).

The disposition of a closed temporary file may vary, perhaps affecting
performance and space availability (ARTEWG 1986).

### Input/Output on Access Types

#### guideline

- Avoid performing I/O on access types.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, §A.7) does not specify the effects of
I/O on access types. When such a value is written, it is placed out of
reach of the implementation. Thus, it is out of reach of the
reliability-enhancing controls of strong type checking.

Consider the meaning of this operation. One possible implementation of
the values of access types is virtual addresses. If you write such a
value, how can you expect another program to read that value and make
any sensible use of it? The value cannot be construed to refer to any
meaningful location within the reader's address space, nor can a reader
infer any information about the writer's address space from the value
read. The latter is the same problem that the writer would have trying
to interpret or use the value if it is read back in. To wit, a garbage
collection and/or heap compaction scheme may have moved the item
formerly accessed by that value, leaving that value "pointing" at space
that is now being put to indeterminable uses by the underlying
implementation.

### Package Ada.Streams.Stream_IO

#### guideline

- Consider using Sequential_IO or Direct_IO instead of Stream_IO
  unless you need the low-level, heterogeneous I/O features provided
  by Stream_IO.

#### rationale

Sequential_IO and Direct_IO are still well suited for processing
homogeneous files. Additionally, in cases where the intent is to process
homogeneous files, the use of Sequential_IO or Direct_IO has the
advantage of enforcing this intent at compile time.

Stream_IO should be reserved for processing heterogeneous files. In
this case, a file is not a sequence of objects of all the same type but
rather a sequence of objects of varying types. To read a heterogeneous
sequence of objects in the correct order requires some
application-specific knowledge.

### Current Error Files

#### guideline

- Consider using Current_Error and Set_Error for run-time error
  messages.

#### example

```ada
with Ada.Text_IO;

...

begin
   Ada.Text_IO.Open (File => Configuration_File,
                     Mode => Ada.Text_IO.In_File,
                     Name => Configuration_File_Name);
exception
   when Ada.Text_IO.Name_Error =>
      Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (File => Ada.Text_IO.Standard_Error,
                            Item => "Can't open configuration file.");
      ...
end;
```

#### rationale

The package Text_IO includes the concept of a current error file. You
should report errors to the user through the associated subprograms
Current_Error and Set_Error instead of the standard output facilities.
In interactive applications, using the Text_IO error facilities
increases the portability of your user interface.

#### notes

In a program with multiple tasks for I/O, you need to be careful of two
or more tasks trying to set Current_Input, Current_Output, or
Current_Error. The potential problem lies in unprotected updates to the
"shared" state associated with a package, in this case, the package
Text_IO. Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.2.4 discuss the related issues of
unprotected shared variables.
