---
title: 9.1 Object-Oriented Design
---

You will find it easier to take advantage of many of the concepts in
this chapter if you have done an object-oriented design. The results of
an object-oriented design would include a set of meaningful abstractions
and hierarchy of classes. The abstractions need to include the
definition of the design objects, including structure and state, the
operations on the objects, and the intended encapsulation for each
object. The details on designing these abstractions and the hierarchy of
classes are beyond the scope of this book. A number of good sources
exist for this detail, including Rumbaugh et al. (1991), Jacobson et al.
(1992), Software Productivity Consortium (1993), and Booch (1994).

An important part of the design process is deciding on the overall
organization of the system. Looking at a single type, a single package,
or even a single class of types by itself is probably the wrong place to
start. The appropriate level to start is more at the level of
"subsystem" or "framework." You should use child packages (Guidelines
4.1.1 and 4.2.2) to group sets of abstractions into subsystems
representing reusable frameworks. You should distinguish the "abstract"
reusable core of the framework from the particular "instantiation" of
the framework. Presuming the framework is constructed properly, the
abstract core and its instantiation can be separated into distinct
subsystems within the package hierarchy because the internals of an
abstract reusable framework probably do not need to be visible to a
particular instantiation of the framework.
