---
title: Ada Quality and Style Guide
description: Guidelines for Professional Programmers
---

> **_Guidelines for Professional Programmers_**

## Preface

This [style guide](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Programming_style) is
an update to the _[Ada 95 Quality and Style
Guide](http://www.adaic.org/docs/95style/html/cover.html)_ to reflect
the latest update to the [Ada
language](<https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ada_(programming_language)>),
commonly called
[Ada 2012](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Programming/Ada_2012). The
purpose of this guide is to help computer professionals produce better
Ada programs by identifying a set of stylistic guidelines that will
directly impact the quality of their Ada programs. This style guide is
not intended to replace the _[Ada Reference
Manual](http://www.ada-auth.org/standards/ada12.html)_, or the
_[Rationale](http://www.ada-auth.org/standards/rationale12.html)_, or to
serve as a tutorial for the [Ada programming
language](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Programming).

The style guide is divided into chapters that map to the major decisions
that each programmer addresses when creating high-quality, reliable,
reusable, and portable Ada software. Some overlap exists in the chapters
because not all programming decisions can be made independently.
Individual chapters address source code presentation, readability,
program structure, programming practice, concurrency, portability,
reusability, performance, and a new chapter on object-oriented features.

Each chapter is divided into guidelines, using a format that supports
wide usage because its content is both prescriptive and tailorable. Each
guideline consists of a concise statement of the principles that should
be followed and a rationale explaining why the guideline is important.
The guidelines also provide usage examples, in addition to possible
exceptions to applying the guidelines. Many of the guidelines are
specific enough to be adopted as corporate or project programming
standards. Others require a managerial decision on a particular
instantiation before they can be used as standards. In such cases, a
sample instantiation is presented and used throughout the examples.

### Background

The Ada Joint Program Office (AJPO) funded the Ada 95 style guide, which
was created by merging a set of guidelines for using
[Ada 95](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Programming/Ada_95) with
modifications to the original _[Ada Quality and Style: Guidelines for
Professional
Programmers](http://archive.adaic.com/docs/style-guide/83style/html/)_,
version 02.01.01 (AQ\&S 83) (Software Productivity Consortium 1992),
developed to support
[Ada 83](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Programming/Ada_83). The Ada
95 guidelines are based on the wealth of data available from the Ada 9X
Project, the AJPO library, and the Ada community at large. The Software
Productivity Consortium's (Consortium's) technical staff authored the
update and the [Advanced Research Projects
Agency](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Advanced_Research_Projects_Agency)
(ARPA) participated in the update effort.

The preexisting AQ\&S 83 presented a set of guidelines to help the
programmer make disciplined use of Ada's features. In 1992, the
Consortium completed the version 2.1 update to the style guide under
contract to the AJPO. The AJPO referred to that style guide as "the
suggested style guide for all DoD programs."

As yet, there is no formal update of the style guide for the Ada 2005 or
the Ada 2012 language revision. During an extended discussion at the
[SIGAda 2008](http://www.sigada.org/conf/sigada2008/) conference of the
style guide via-a-vis the Ada 2005 update and its continuing relevance,
several attendees volunteered to bring the guide to
[wikibooks](https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Main_Page) to encourage
collaborative updating of the guide by putting the update in the hands
of practitioners of the language. This is in part made possible under
the terms of the DoD Ada Joint Program Office's royalty-free, worldwide,
non-exclusive, irrevocable license for unlimited use of the material in
the Ada 83 and 95 style guides.

:::note

This page of the "Ada Quality and Style Guide" has been adapted from the
original work at https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide, which is
licensed under the
[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/);
additional terms may apply. Page not endorsed by Wikibooks or the Ada
Style Guide Wikibook authors. This page is licensed under the same license
as the original work.

:::
