---
title: Concurrency
sidebar_position: 6
---

Concurrency exists as either apparent concurrency or real concurrency.
In a single processor environment, apparent concurrency is the result of
interleaved execution of concurrent activities. In a multiprocessor
environment, real concurrency is the result of overlapped execution of
concurrent activities.

Concurrent programming is more difficult and error prone than sequential
programming. The concurrent programming features of Ada are designed to
make it easier to write and maintain concurrent programs that behave
consistently and predictably and avoid such problems as deadlock and
starvation. The language features themselves cannot guarantee that
programs have these desirable properties. They must be used with
discipline and care, a process supported by the guidelines in this
chapter.

The correct usage of Ada concurrency features results in reliable,
reusable, and portable software. Protected objects (added in Ada 95)
encapsulate and provide synchronized access to their private data
(Rationale 1995, §II.9). Protected objects help you manage shared data
without incurring a performance penalty. Tasks model concurrent
activities and use the rendezvous to synchronize between cooperating
concurrent tasks. Much of the synchronization required between tasks
involves data synchronization, which can be accomplished most
efficiently, in general, using protected objects. Misuse of language
features results in software that is unverifiable and difficult to reuse
or port. For example, using task priorities or delays to manage
synchronization is not portable. It is also important that a reusable
component not make assumptions about the order or speed of task
execution (i.e., about the compiler's tasking implementation).

Although concurrent features such as tasks and protected objects are
supported by the core Ada language, care should be taken when using
these features with implementations that do not specifically support
Annex D (Real-Time Systems). If Annex D is not specifically supported,
features required for real-time applications might not be implemented.

Guidelines in this chapter are frequently worded "consider . . ."
because hard and fast rules cannot apply in all situations. The specific
choice you make in a given situation involves design tradeoffs. The
rationale for these guidelines is intended to give you insight into some
of these tradeoffs.

## Concurrency Options

Many problems map naturally to a concurrent programming solution. By
understanding and correctly using the Ada language concurrency features,
you can produce solutions that are largely independent of target
implementation. Tasks provide a means, within the Ada language, of
expressing concurrent, asynchronous threads of control and relieving
programmers from the problem of explicitly controlling multiple
concurrent activities. Protected objects serve as a building block to
support other synchronization paradigms. Tasks cooperate to perform the
required activities of the software. Synchronization and mutual
exclusion are required between individual tasks. The Ada rendezvous and
protected objects provide powerful mechanisms for both synchronization
and mutual exclusion.

### Protected Objects

#### guideline

  - Consider using protected objects to provide mutually exclusive
    access to data.
  - Consider using protected objects to control or synchronize access to
    data shared by multiple tasks .
  - Consider using protected objects to implement synchronization, such
    as a passive resource monitor.
  - Consider encapsulating protected objects in the private part or body
    of a package.
  - Consider using a protected procedure to implement an interrupt
    handler.
  - Do not attach a protected procedure handler to a hardware interrupt
    if that interrupt has a maximum priority greater than the ceiling
    priority assigned to the handler.
  - Avoid the use of global variables in entry barriers.
  - Avoid the use of barrier expressions with side effects.

#### example

``` ada
generic
   type Item is private;
   Maximum_Buffer_Size : in Positive;
package Bounded_Buffer_Package is

   subtype Buffer_Index is Positive range 1..Maximum_Buffer_Size;
   subtype Buffer_Count is Natural  range 0..Maximum_Buffer_Size;
   type    Buffer_Array is array (Buffer_Index) of Item;

   protected type Bounded_Buffer is
      entry Get (X : out Item);
      entry Put (X : in Item);
   private
      Get_Index : Buffer_Index := 1;
      Put_Index : Buffer_Index := 1;
      Count     : Buffer_Count := 0;
      Data      : Buffer_Array;
   end Bounded_Buffer;

end Bounded_Buffer_Package;

------------------------------------------------------------------
package body Bounded_Buffer_Package is

   protected body Bounded_Buffer is

      entry Get (X : out Item) when Count > 0 is
      begin
         X := Data(Get_Index);
         Get_Index := (Get_Index mod Maximum_Buffer_Size) + 1;
         Count := Count - 1;
      end Get;

      entry Put (X : in Item) when Count < Maximum_Buffer_Size is
      begin
         Data(Put_Index) := X;
         Put_Index  := (Put_Index mod Maximum_Buffer_Size) + 1;
         Count := Count + 1;
      end Put;

   end Bounded_Buffer;

end Bounded_Buffer_Package;
```

#### rationale

Protected objects are intended to provide a "lightweight" mechanism for
mutual exclusion and data synchronization. You should use a task only
when you need to introduce explicitly a new, concurrent thread of
control (see Guideline 6.1.2).

Protected objects offer a low overhead, efficient means to coordinate
access to shared data. A protected type declaration is similar to a
program unit and consists of both a specification and a body. The data
to be protected must be declared in the specification, as well as the
operations that can be used to manipulate this data. If some operations
are only allowed conditionally, entries must be provided. Ada 95 rules
require that entry barriers be evaluated at the end of procedure calls
and entry calls on protected objects. Entry barriers should avoid
referring to global variables so that the underlying assumptions of the
state of the protected object are not violated. Protected procedures and
entries should be used to change the state of a protected object.

Most clients of an abstraction do not need to know how it is
implemented, whether it is a regular abstraction or a shared
abstraction. A protected type is inherently a limited type, and you can
use protected types to implement a limited private type exported by a
package. As pointed out in Guideline 5.3.3, abstractions are best
implemented using private types (possibly derived from controlled types)
or limited private types, providing appropriate operations that overcome
the restrictiveness imposed by the use of private types.

The Rationale (1995, §9.1) describes the interrupt handling features
that make the protected procedure the recommended building block:

A protected procedure is very well suited to act as an interrupt handler
for a number of reasons; they both typically have a short bounded
execution time, do not arbitrarily block, have a limited context and
finally they both have to integrate with the priority model. The
nonblocking critical region matches the needs of an interrupt handler,
as well as the needs of non-interrupt-level code to synchronize with an
interrupt handler. The entry barrier construct allows an interrupt
handler to signal a normal task by changing the state of a component of
the protected object and thereby making a barrier true.

When using protected procedures for interrupt handling, you must ensure
that the ceiling priority of the handler is at least as high as the
maximum possible priority of the interrupt to be handled. With
priority-ceiling locking, the delivery of an interrupt with a higher
priority than the ceiling priority of the handler will result in
erroneous execution (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §C.3.1).

A global variable could be changed by another task or even by a call of
a protected function. These changes will not be acted upon promptly.
Therefore, you should not use a global variable in an entry barrier.

Side effects in barrier expressions can cause undesirable dependencies.
Therefore, you should avoid the use of barrier expressions that can
cause side effects.

See also Guideline .

#### exceptions

If the client of the abstraction containing the protected object must
use a select statement with an entry call, you must expose the protected
object on the package interface.

### Tasks

#### guideline

  - Use tasks to model selected asynchronous threads of control within
    the problem domain.
  - Consider using tasks to define concurrent algorithms.
  - Consider using rendezvous when your application requires synchronous
    unbuffered communication.

#### example

The naturally concurrent objects within the problem domain can be
modeled as Ada tasks.

``` ada
-- The following example of a stock exchange simulation shows how naturally
-- concurrent objects within the problem domain can be modeled as Ada tasks.

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- Protected objects are used for the Display and for the Transaction_Queue
-- because they only need a mutual exclusion mechanism.

protected Display is
   entry Shift_Tape_Left;
   entry Put_Character_On_Tape (C : in Character);
end Display;

protected Transaction_Queue is
   entry Put (T : in     Transaction);
   entry Get (T :    out Transaction);
   function Is_Empty return Boolean;
end Transaction_Queue;

-------------------------------------------------------------------------

-- A task is needed for the Ticker_Tape because it has independent cyclic
-- activity.  The Specialist and the Investor are best modeled with tasks
-- since they perform different actions simultaneously, and should be
-- asynchronous threads of control.

task Ticker_Tape;

task Specialist is
   entry Buy  (Order : in Order_Type);
   entry Sell (Order : in Order_Type);
end Specialist;

task Investor;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Ticker_Tape is
   ...
begin
   loop
      Display.Shift_Tape_Left;

      if not More_To_Send (Current_Tape_String) and then
         not Transaction_Queue.Is_Empty
      then
         Transaction_Queue.Get (Current_Tape_Transaction);
         ... -- convert Transaction to string
      end if;

      if More_To_Send (Current_Tape_String) then
         Display.Put_Character_On_Tape (Next_Char);
      end if;

      delay until Time_To_Shift_Tape;
      Time_To_Shift_Tape := Time_To_Shift_Tape + Shift_Interval;
   end loop;
end Ticker_Tape;

task body Specialist is 
   ...

   loop
      select
         accept Buy  (Order : in Order_Type) do
            ...
         end Buy;
         ...
      or
         accept Sell (Order : in Order_Type) do
            ...
         end Sell;
         ...
      else
         -- match orders
         ...
         Transaction_Queue.Put (New_Transaction);
         ...
      end select;
   end loop;

end Specialist;

task body Investor is
   ...
begin

   loop
      -- some algorithm that determines whether the investor
      -- buys or sells, quantity, price, etc

      ...

      if ... then
         Specialist.Buy (Order);
      end if;

      if ... then
         Specialist.Sell (Order);
      end if;
   end loop;

end Investor;
```

Multiple tasks that implement the decomposition of a large, matrix
multiplication algorithm are an example of an opportunity for real
concurrency in a multiprocessor target environment. In a single
processor target environment, this approach may not be justified due to
the overhead incurred from context switching and the sharing of system
resources.

A task that updates a radar display every 30 milliseconds is an example
of a cyclic activity supported by a task.

A task that detects an over-temperature condition in a nuclear reactor
and performs an emergency shutdown of the systems is an example of a
task to support a high-priority activity.

#### rationale

These guidelines reflect the intended uses of tasks. They all revolve
around the fact that a task has its own thread of control separate from
the main subprogram (or environment task) of a partition. The conceptual
model for a task is a separate program with its own virtual processor.
This provides the opportunity to model entities from the problem domain
in terms more closely resembling those entities and the opportunity to
handle physical devices as a separate concern from the main algorithm of
the application. Tasks also allow naturally concurrent activities that
can be mapped to multiple processors within a partition when available.

You should use tasks for separate threads of control. When you
synchronize tasks, you should use the rendezvous mechanism only when you
are trying to synchronize actual processes (e.g., specify a
time-sensitive ordering relationship or tightly coupled interprocess
communication). For most synchronization needs, however, you should use
protected objects (see Guideline 6.1.1), which are more flexible and can
minimize unnecessary bottlenecks. Additionally, passive tasks are
probably better modeled through protected objects than active tasks.

Resources shared between multiple tasks, such as devices, require
control and synchronization because their operations are not atomic.
Drawing a circle on a display might require that many low-level
operations be performed without interruption by another task. A display
manager would ensure that no other task accesses the display until all
these operations are complete.

### Discriminants

#### guideline

  - Consider using discriminants to minimize the need for an explicit
    initialization operation (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider using discriminants to control composite components of the
    protected objects, including setting the size of an entry family
    (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider using a discriminant to set the priority of a protected
    object (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider using a discriminant to identify an interrupt to a
    protected object (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider declaring a task type with a discriminant to indicate
    (Rationale 1995, §9.6):
      - Priority, storage size, and size of entry families of individual
        tasks of a type
      - Data associated with a task (through an access discriminant)

#### example

The following code fragment shows how a task type with discriminant can
be used to associate data with a task (Rationale 1995, §9.6):

``` ada
type Task_Data is
   record
      ...  -- data for task to work on
   end record;
task type Worker (D : access Task_Data) is
   ...
end;
-- When you declare a task object of type Worker, you explicitly associate this task with
-- its data through the discriminant D
Data_for_Worker_X : aliased Task_Data := ...;
X : Worker (Data_for_Worker_X'Access);
```

The following example shows how to use discriminants to associate data
with tasks, thus allowing the tasks to be parameterized when they are
declared and eliminating the need for an initial rendezvous with the
task:

``` ada
task type Producer (Channel : Channel_Number; ID : ID_Number);

task body Producer is
begin

   loop

      ... -- generate an item

      Buffer.Put (New_Item);

   end loop;
end Producer;

...

Keyboard : Producer (Channel => Keyboard_Channel, ID => 1);
Mouse    : Producer (Channel => Mouse_Channel,    ID => 2);
```

The next example shows how an initial rendezvous can be used to
associate data with tasks. This is more complicated and more error prone
than the previous example. This method is no longer needed in Ada 95 due
to the availability of discriminants with task types and protected
types:

``` ada
task type Producer is
   entry Initialize (Channel : in Channel_Number; ID : in ID_Number);
end Producer;

task body Producer is
   IO_Channel  : Channel_Number;
   Producer_ID : ID_Number;
begin

   accept Initialize (Channel : in Channel_Number; ID : in ID_Number) do
      IO_Channel  := Channel;
      Producer_ID := ID;
   end;

   loop

      ... -- generate an item

      Buffer.Put (New_Item);

   end loop;
end Producer;

...

Keyboard : Producer;
Mouse    : Producer;

...

begin
   ...
   Keyboard.Initialize (Channel => Keyboard_Channel, ID => 1);
   Mouse.Initialize    (Channel => Mouse_Channel,    ID => 2);
   ...
```

#### rationale

Using discriminants to parameterize protected objects provides a
low-overhead way of specializing the protected object. You avoid having
to declare and call special subprograms solely for the purpose of
passing this information to the protected object.

Task discriminants provide a way for you to identify or parameterize a
task without the overhead of an initial rendezvous. For example, you can
use this discriminant to initialize a task or tell it who it is (from
among an array of tasks) (Rationale 1995, §II.9). More importantly, you
can associate the discriminant with specific data. When you use an
access discriminant, you can bind the data securely to the task because
the access discriminant is constant and cannot be detached from the task
(Rationale 1995, §9.6). This reduces and might eliminate bottlenecks in
the parallel activation of tasks (Rationale 1995, §9.6).

#### notes

Using an access discriminant to initialize a task has a potential danger
in that the data being referenced could change after the rendezvous.
This possibility and its effects should be considered and, if necessary,
appropriate actions taken (e.g., copy the referenced data and not rely
on the data pointed to by the discriminant after initialization).

### Anonymous Task Types and Protected Types

#### guideline

  - Consider using single task declarations to declare unique instances
    of concurrent tasks.
  - Consider using single protected declarations to declare unique
    instances of protected objects.

#### example

The following example illustrates the syntactic differences between the
kinds of tasks and protected objects discussed here. Buffer is static,
but its type is anonymous. No type name is declared to enable you to
declare further objects of the same type.

``` ada
task      Buffer;
```

Because it is declared explicitly, the task type Buffer\_Manager is not
anonymous. Channel is static and has a name, and its type is not
anonymous.

``` ada
task type Buffer_Manager;
Channel : Buffer_Manager;
```

#### rationale

The use of anonymous tasks and protected objects of anonymous type
avoids a proliferation of task and protected types that are only used
once, and the practice communicates to maintainers that there are no
other tasks or protected objects of that type. If the need arises later
to have additional tasks or protected objects of the same type, then the
work required to convert an anonymous task to a task type or an
anonymous protected object to a protected type is minimal.

The consistent and logical use of task and protected types, when
necessary, contributes to understandability. Identical tasks can be
declared using a common task type. Identical protected objects can be
declared using a common protected type. Dynamically allocated task or
protected structures are necessary when you must create and destroy
tasks or protected objects dynamically or when you must reference them
by different names.

#### notes

Though changing the task or protected object from an anonymous type to a
declared type is trivial, structural changes to the software
architecture might not be trivial. Introduction of multiple tasks or
protected objects of the declared type might require the scope of the
type to change and might change the behavior of the network of
synchronizing tasks and protected objects.

### Dynamic Tasks

#### guideline

  - Minimize dynamic creation of tasks because of the potentially high
    startup overhead; reuse tasks by having them wait for new work on
    some appropriate entry queue.

#### example

The approach used in the following example is not recommended. The
example shows why caution is required with dynamically allocated task
and protected objects. It illustrates how a dynamic task can be
disassociated from its name:

``` ada
task type Radar_Track;
type      Radar_Track_Pointer is access Radar_Track;
Current_Track : Radar_Track_Pointer;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Radar_Track is
begin
   loop
      -- update tracking information
      ...
      -- exit when out of range
      delay 1.0;
   end loop;
...
end Radar_Track;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
...
loop
   ...
   -- Radar_Track tasks created in previous passes through the loop
   -- cannot be accessed from Current_Track after it is updated.
   -- Unless some code deals with non-null values of Current_Track,
   -- (such as an array of existing tasks)
   -- this assignment leaves the existing Radar_Track task running with
   -- no way to signal it to abort or to instruct the system to
   -- reclaim its resources.

   Current_Track := new Radar_Track;
   ...
end loop;
```

#### rationale

Starting up a task has significant overhead in many implementations. If
an application has a need for dynamically created tasks, the tasks
should be implemented with a top-level loop so that after such a task
completes its given job, it can cycle back and wait for a new job.

You can use dynamically allocated tasks and protected objects when you
need to allow the number of tasks and protected objects to vary during
execution. When you must ensure that tasks are activated in a particular
order, you should use dynamically allocated tasks because the Ada
language does not define an activation order for statically allocated
task objects. In using dynamically allocated tasks and protected
objects, you face the same issues as with any use of the heap.

### Priorities

#### guideline

  - Do not rely on pragma Priority unless your compiler supports the
    Real-Time Annex (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex D) and priority
    scheduling.
  - Minimize risk of priority inversion by use of protected objects and
    ceiling priority.
  - Do not rely upon task priorities to achieve a particular sequence of
    task execution.

#### example

For example, let the tasks have the following priorities:

``` ada
task T1 is
   pragma Priority (High);
end T1;

task T2 is
   pragma Priority (Medium);
end T2;

task Server is
   entry Operation (...);
end Server;

----------------------------
task body T1 is
begin
   ...
   Server.Operation (...);
   ...
end T1;
task body T2 is
begin
   ...
   Server.Operation (...);
   ...
end T2;

task body Server is
begin
   ...
   accept Operation (...);
   ...
end Server;
```

At some point in its execution, T1 is blocked. Otherwise, T2 and Server
might never execute. If T1 is blocked, it is possible for T2 to reach
its call to Server's entry (Operation) before T1. Suppose this has
happened and that T1 now makes its entry call before Server has a chance
to accept T2's call.

This is the timeline of events so far:

T1 blocks T2 calls Server.Operation T1 unblocks T1 calls
Server.Operation—Does Server accept the call from T1 or from T2?

You might expect that, due to its higher priority, T1's call would be
accepted by Server before that of T2. However, entry calls are queued in
first-in-first-out (FIFO) order and not queued in order of priority
(unless pragma Queueing\_Policy is used). Therefore, the synchronization
between T1 and Server is not affected by T1's priority. As a result, the
call from T2 is accepted first. This is a form of priority inversion.
(Annex D can change the default policy of FIFO queues.)

A solution might be to provide an entry for a High priority user and an
entry for a Medium priority user.

``` ada
---------------------------------------------------------------------
task Server is
   entry Operation_High_Priority;
   entry Operation_Medium_Priority;
   ...
end Server;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Server is
begin
   loop
      select
         accept Operation_High_Priority do
            Operation;
         end Operation_High_Priority;
      else  -- accept any priority
         select
            accept Operation_High_Priority do
               Operation;
            end Operation_High_Priority;
         or
            accept Operation_Medium_Priority do
               Operation;
            end Operation_Medium_Priority;
         or
            terminate;
         end select;
      end select;
   end loop;
...
end Server;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
```

However, in this approach, T1 still waits for one execution of Operation
when T2 has already gained control of the task Server. In addition, the
approach increases the communication complexity (see Guideline 6.2.6).

#### rationale

The pragma Priority allows relative priorities to be placed on tasks to
accomplish scheduling. Precision becomes a critical issue with
hard-deadline scheduling. However, there are certain problems associated
with using priorities that warrant caution.

Priority inversion occurs when lower priority tasks are given service
while higher priority tasks remain blocked. In the first example, this
occurred because entry queues are serviced in FIFO order, not by
priority. There is another situation referred to as a race condition . A
program like the one in the first example might often behave as expected
as long as T1 calls Server.Operation only when T2 is not already using
Server.Operation or waiting. You cannot rely on T1 always winning the
race because that behavior would be due more to fate than to the
programmed priorities. Race conditions change when either adding code to
an unrelated task or porting this code to a new target.

You should not rely upon task priorities to achieve an exact sequence of
execution or rely upon them to achieve mutual exclusion. Although the
underlying dispatching model is common to all Ada 95 implementations,
there might be differences in dispatching, queuing, and locking policies
for tasks and protected objects. All of these factors might lead to
different sequences of execution. If you need to ensure a sequence of
execution, you should make use of Ada's synchronization mechanisms,
i.e., protected objects or rendezvous.

#### notes

Work is being done to minimize these problems, including the
introduction of a scheduling algorithm known as the priority ceiling
protocol (Goodenough and Sha 1988). The priority ceiling protocol
reduces the blocking time that causes priority inversion to only one
critical region (defined by the entries in a task). The protocol also
eliminates deadlock (unless a task recursively tries to access a
critical region) by giving a ceiling priority to each task accessing a
resource that is as high as the priority of any task that ever accesses
that resource. This protocol is based on priority inheritance and, thus,
deviates from the standard Ada tasking paradigm, which supports priority
ceiling emulation instead of the priority ceiling blocking that occurs
with priority inheritance.

Priorities are used to control when tasks run relative to one another.
When both tasks are not blocked waiting at an entry, the highest
priority task is given precedence. However, the most critical tasks in
an application do not always have the highest priority. For example,
support tasks or tasks with small periods might have higher priorities
because they need to run frequently.

All production-quality validated Ada 95 compilers will probably support
pragma Priority. However, you should use caution unless (Annex D is
specifically supported.

There is currently no universal consensus on how to apply the basic
principles of rate monotonic scheduling (RMS) to the Ada 95 concurrency
model. One basic principle of RMS is to arrange all periodic tasks so
that tasks with shorter periods have higher priorities than tasks with
longer periods. However, with Ada 95, it might be faster to raise the
priorities of tasks whose jobs suddenly become critical than to wait for
an executive task to reschedule them. In this case, priority inversion
can be minimized using a protected object with pragma
Locking\_Policy(Ceiling\_Locking) as the server instead of a task.

### Delay Statements

#### guideline

  - Do not depend on a particular delay being achievable (Nissen and
    Wallis 1984).
  - Use a delay until not a delay statement to delay until a specific
    time has been reached.
  - Avoid using a busy waiting loop instead of a delay.

#### example

The phase of a periodic task is the fraction of a complete cycle elapsed
as measured from a specified reference point. In the following example,
an inaccurate delay causes the phase of the periodic task to drift over
time (i.e., the task starts later and later in the cycle):

Periodic:

``` ada
   loop
      delay Interval;
      ...
   end loop Periodic;
```

To avoid an inaccurate delay drift, you should use the delay until
statement. The following example (Rationale 1995, §9.3) shows how to
satisfy a periodic requirement with an average period:

``` ada
task body Poll_Device is
   use type Ada.Real_Time.Time;
   use type Ada.Real_Time.Time_Span;

   Poll_Time :          Ada.Real_Time.Time := ...; -- time to start polling
   Period    : constant Ada.Real_Time.Time_Span := Ada.Real_Time.Milliseconds (10);
begin
   loop
      delay until Poll_Time;
      ... -- Poll the device
      Poll_Time := Poll_Time + Period;
   end loop;
end Poll_Device;
```

#### rationale

There are two forms of delay statement. The delay will cause a delay for
at least a specified time interval. The delay until causes a delay until
an absolute wake-up time. You should choose the form appropriate to your
application.

The Ada language definition only guarantees that the delay time is a
minimum. The meaning of a delay or delay until statement is that the
task is not scheduled for execution before the interval has expired. In
other words, a task becomes eligible to resume execution as soon as the
amount of time has passed. However, there is no guarantee of when (or
if) it is scheduled after that time because the required resources for
that task might not be available at the expiration of the delay .

A busy wait can interfere with processing by other tasks. It can consume
the very processor resource necessary for completion of the activity for
which it is waiting. Even a loop with a delay can have the impact of
busy waiting if the planned wait is significantly longer than the delay
interval. If a task has nothing to do, it should be blocked at an accept
or select statement, an entry call, or an appropriate delay.

The expiration time for a relative delay is rounded up to the nearest
clock tick. If you use the real-time clock features provided by (Annex
D, however, clock ticks are guaranteed to be no greater than one
millisecond (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §D.8).

#### notes

You need to ensure the arithmetic precision of the calculation
Poll\_Time := Poll\_Time + Period; to avoid drift.

### Extensibility and Concurrent Structures

#### guideline

  - Carefully consider the placement of components of protected types
    within a tagged type inheritance hierarchy.
  - Consider using generics to provide extensibility of data types
    requiring the restrictions provided by protected objects.

#### rationale

Once a component of a protected type is added to an inheritance
hierarchy of an abstract data type, further extensibility of that data
type is impaired. When you constrain the concurrent behavior of a type
(i.e., introduce a protected type component), you lose the ability to
modify that behavior in subsequent derivations. Therefore, when the need
arises for a version of an abstract data type to impose the restrictions
provided by protected objects, the opportunity for reuse is maximized by
adding the protected objects at the leaves of the inheritance hierarchy.

The reusability of common protected operations (e.g., mutually exclusive
read/write operations) can be maximized by using generic implementations
of abstract data types. These generic implementations then provide
templates that can be instantiated with data types specific to
individual applications.

#### notes

You can address synchronization within an inheritance hierarchy in one
of three ways:

  - You can declare the root as a limited tagged type with a component
    that belongs to a protected type and give the tagged type primitive
    operations that work by invoking the protected operations of that
    component.
  - Given a tagged type implementing an abstract data type (perhaps
    resulting from several extensions), you can declare a protected type
    with a component belonging to the tagged type. The body of each
    protected operation would then invoke the corresponding operation of
    the abstract data type. The protected operations provide mutual
    exclusion.
  - You can use a hybrid approach where you declare a protected type
    with a component of some tagged type. You then use this protected
    type to implement a new root tagged type (not a descendant of the
    original tagged type).

## Communication

The need for tasks to communicate gives rise to most of the problems
that make concurrent programming so difficult. Used properly, Ada's
intertask communication features can improve the reliability of
concurrent programs; used thoughtlessly, they can introduce subtle
errors that can be difficult to detect and correct.

### Efficient Task Communication

#### guideline

  - Minimize the work performed during a rendezvous.
  - Minimize the work performed in the selective accept loop of a task.
  - Consider using protected objects for data synchronization and
    communication.

#### example

In the following example, the statements in the accept body are
performed as part of the execution of both the caller task and the task
Server, which contains Operation and Operation2. The statements after
the accept body are executed before Server can accept additional calls
to Operation or Operation2.

``` ada
   ...
   loop
      select
         accept Operation do
            -- These statements are executed during rendezvous.
            -- Both caller and server are blocked during this time.
            ...
         end Operation;
         ...
         -- These statements are not executed during rendezvous.
         -- The execution of these statements increases the time required
         --   to get back to the accept and might be a candidate for another task.

      or
         accept Operation_2 do
            -- These statements are executed during rendezvous.
            -- Both caller and server are blocked during this time.
            ...
         end Operation_2;
      end select;
      -- These statements are also not executed during rendezvous,
      -- The execution of these statements increases the time required
      --   to get back to the accept and might be a candidate for another task.

   end loop;
```

#### rationale

To minimize the time required to rendezvous, only work that needs to be
performed during a rendezvous, such as saving or generating parameters,
should be allowed in the accept bodies.

When work is removed from the accept body and placed later in the
selective accept loop, the additional work might still suspend the
caller task. If the caller task calls entry Operation again before the
server task completes its additional work, the caller is delayed until
the server completes the additional work. If the potential delay is
unacceptable and the additional work does not need to be completed
before the next service of the caller task, the additional work can form
the basis of a new task that will not block the caller task.

Operations on protected objects incur less execution overhead than tasks
and are more efficient for data synchronization and communication than
the rendezvous. You must design protected operations to be bounded,
short, and not potentially blocking.

#### notes

In some cases, additional functions can be added to a task. For example,
a task controlling a communication device might be responsible for a
periodic function to ensure that the device is operating correctly. This
type of addition should be done with care, realizing that the response
time of the task might be impacted (see the above rationale).

Minimizing the work performed during a rendezvous or selective accept
loop of a task can increase the rate of execution only when it results
in additional overlaps in processing between the caller and callee or
when other tasks can be scheduled due to the shorter period of
execution. Therefore, the largest increases in execution rates will be
seen in multiprocessor environments. In single-processor environments,
the increased execution rate will not be as significant and there might
even be a small net loss. The guideline is still applicable, however, if
the application could ever be ported to a multiprocessor environment.

### Defensive Task Communication

#### guideline

  - Provide a handler for exception Program\_Error whenever you cannot
    avoid a selective accept statement whose alternatives can all be
    closed (Honeywell 1986).
  - Make systematic use of handlers for Tasking\_Error.
  - Be prepared to handle exceptions during a rendezvous .
  - Consider using a when others exception handler.

#### example

This block allows recovery from exceptions raised while attempting to
communicate a command to another task:

``` ada
Accelerate:
   begin
      Throttle.Increase(Step);
   exception
      when Tasking_Error     =>     ...
      when Constraint_Error  =>     ...
      when Throttle_Too_Wide =>     ...
      ...
   end Accelerate;
```

In this select statement, if all the guards happen to be closed, the
program can continue by executing the else part. There is no need for a
handler for Program\_Error. Other exceptions can still be raised while
evaluating the guards or attempting to communicate. You will also need
to include an exception handler in the task Throttle so that it can
continue to execute after an exception is raised during the rendezvous:

``` ada
...
Guarded:
   begin
      select
         when Condition_1 =>
            accept Entry_1;
      or
         when Condition_2 =>
            accept Entry_2;
      else  -- all alternatives closed
         ...
      end select;
   exception
      when Constraint_Error =>
         ...
   end Guarded;
```

In this select statement, if all the guards happen to be closed,
exception Program\_Error will be raised. Other exceptions can still be
raised while evaluating the guards or attempting to communicate:

``` ada
Guarded:
   begin
      select
         when Condition_1 =>
            accept Entry_1;
      or
         when Condition_2 =>
            delay Fraction_Of_A_Second;
      end select;
   exception
      when Program_Error     =>  ...
      when Constraint_Error  =>  ...
   end Guarded;
...
```

#### rationale

The exception Program\_Error is raised if a selective accept statement
(select statement containing accepts) is reached, all of whose
alternatives are closed (i.e., the guards evaluate to False and there
are no alternatives without guards), unless there is an else part. When
all alternatives are closed, the task can never again progress, so there
is by definition an error in its programming. You must be prepared to
handle this error should it occur.

Because an else part cannot have a guard, it can never be closed off as
an alternative action; thus, its presence prevents Program\_Error.
However, an else part, a delay alternative, and a terminate alternative
are all mutually exclusive, so you will not always be able to provide an
else part. In these cases, you must be prepared to handle
Program\_Error.

The exception Tasking\_Error can be raised in the calling task whenever
it attempts to communicate. There are many situations permitting this.
Few of them are preventable by the calling task.

If an exception is raised during a rendezvous and not handled in the
accept statement, it is propagated to both tasks and must be handled in
two places (see Guideline 5.8). The handling of the others exception can
be used to avoid propagating unexpected exceptions to callers (when this
is the desired effect) and to localize the logic for dealing with
unexpected exceptions in the rendezvous. After handling, an unknown
exception should normally be raised again because the final decision of
how to deal with it might need to be made at the outermost scope of the
task body.

#### notes

There are other ways to prevent Program\_Error at a selective accept.
These involve leaving at least one alternative unguarded or proving that
at least one guard will evaluate True under all circumstances. The point
here is that you or your successors will make mistakes in trying to do
this, so you should prepare to handle the inevitable exception.

### Attributes 'Count, 'Callable, and 'Terminated

#### guideline

  - Do not depend on the values of the task attributes 'Callable or
    'Terminated ( Nissen and Wallis 1984).
  - Do not depend on attributes to avoid Tasking\_Error on an entry
    call.
  - For tasks, do not depend on the value of the entry attribute 'Count.
  - Using the 'Count attribute with protected entries is more reliable
    than using the 'Count attribute with task entries.

#### example

In the following examples, Dispatch'Callable is a Boolean expression,
indicating whether a call can be made to the task Intercept without
raising the exception Tasking\_Error. Dispatch'Count indicates the
number of callers currently waiting at entry Transmit.
Dispatch'Terminated is a Boolean expression, indicating whether the task
Dispatch is in a terminated state.

This task is badly programmed because it relies upon the values of the
'Count attributes not changing between evaluating and acting upon them:

``` ada
---------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Dispatch is
...
   select
      when Transmit'Count > 0 and Receive'Count = 0 =>
         accept Transmit;
         ...
   or
      accept Receive;
      ...
   end select;
...
end Dispatch;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
```

If the following code is preempted between evaluating the condition and
initiating the call, the assumption that the task is still callable
might no longer be valid:

``` ada
...
if Dispatch'Callable then
   Dispatch.Receive;
end if;
...
```

#### rationale

Attributes 'Callable, 'Terminated, and 'Count are all subject to race
conditions. Between the time you reference an attribute and the time you
take action, the value of the attribute might change. Attributes
'Callable and 'Terminated convey reliable information once they become
False and True, respectively. If 'Callable is False, you can expect the
callable state to remain constant. If 'Terminated is True, you can
expect the task to remain terminated. Otherwise, 'Terminated and
'Callable can change between the time your code tests them and the time
it responds to the result.

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, §9.9) itself warns about the
asynchronous increase and decrease of the value of 'Count. A task can be
removed from an entry queue due to execution of an abort statement as
well as expiration of a timed entry call. The use of this attribute in
guards of a selective accept statement might result in the opening of
alternatives that should not be opened under a changed value of 'Count.

The value of the attribute 'Count is stable for protected units because
any change to an entry queue is itself a protected action, which will
not occur while any other protected action is already proceeding.
Nevertheless, when you use 'Count within an entry barrier of a protected
unit, you should remember that the condition of the barrier is evaluated
both before and after queueing a given caller.

### Unprotected Shared Variables

#### guideline

  - Use calls on protected subprograms or entries to pass data between
    tasks rather than unprotected shared variables.
  - Do not use unprotected shared variables as a task synchronization
    device.
  - Do not reference nonlocal variables in a guard .
  - If an unprotected shared variable is necessary, use the pragma
    Volatile or Atomic.

#### example

This code will either print the same line more than once, fail to print
some lines, or print garbled lines (part of one line followed by part of
another) nondeterministically. This is because there is no
synchronization or mutual exclusion between the task that reads a
command and the one that acts on it. Without knowledge about their
relative scheduling, the actual results cannot be predicted:

``` ada
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Line_Printer_Driver is
   ...
begin
   loop
      Current_Line := Line_Buffer;
      -- send to device
   end loop;
end Line_Printer_Driver;
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Spool_Server is
   ...
begin
   loop
      Disk_Read (Spool_File, Line_Buffer);
   end loop;
end Spool_Server;
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
```

The following example shows a vending machine that dispenses the amount
requested into an appropriately sized container. The guards reference
the global variables Num\_Requested and Item\_Count, leading to a
potential problem in the wrong amount being dispensed into an
inappropriately sized container:

``` ada
Num_Requested : Natural;
Item_Count    : Natural := 1000;
task type Request_Manager (Personal_Limit : Natural := 1) is
   entry Make_Request (Num : Natural);
   entry Get_Container;
   entry Dispense;
end Request_Manager;

task body Request_Manager is
begin
   loop
      select
         accept Make_Request (Num : Natural) do
            Num_Requested := Num;
         end Make_Request;
      or
         when Num_Requested < Item_Count =>
            accept Get_Container;
            ...
      or
         when Num_Requested < Item_Count =>
            accept Dispense do
               if Num_Requested <= Personal_Limit then
                  Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line ("Please pick up items.");
               else
                  Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line ("Sorry! Requesting too many items.");
               end if;
            end Dispense;
      end select;
   end loop;
end Request_Manager;
R1 : Request_Manager (Personal_Limit => 10);
R2 : Request_Manager (Personal_Limit => 2);  
```

The interleaving of the execution of R1 and R2 can lead to
Num\_Requested being changed before the entry call to Dispense is
accepted. Thus, R1 might receive fewer items than requested or R2's
request might be bounced because the request manager thinks that what R2
is requesting exceeds R2's personal limit. By using the local variable,
you will dispense the correct amount. Furthermore, by using the pragma
Volatile (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §C.6), you ensure that the
Item\_Count is reevaluated when the guards are evaluated. Given that the
variable Item\_Count is not updated in this task body, the compiler
might otherwise have optimized the code and not generated code to
reevaluate Item\_Count every time it is read:

``` ada
Item_Count : Natural := 1000;
pragma Volatile (Item_Count);
task body Request_Manager is
   Local_Num_Requested : Natural := 0;
begin
   loop
      select
         accept Make_Request (Num : Natural) do
            Local_Num_Requested := Num;
         end Make_Request;
      or
         when Local_Num_Requested <= Personal_Limit =>
            accept Get_Container;
            ...
      or
         when Local_Num_Requested < Item_Count =>
            accept Dispense do
               ... -- output appropriate message if couldn't service request
            end Dispense;
            Item_Count := Item_Count - Local_Num_Requested; 
      end select;
   end loop;
end Request_Manager;
```

#### rationale

There are many techniques for protecting and synchronizing data access.
You must program most of them yourself to use them. It is difficult to
write a program that shares unprotected data correctly. If it is not
done correctly, the reliability of the program suffers.

Ada provides protected objects that encapsulate and provide synchronized
access to protected data that is shared between tasks. Protected objects
are expected to provide better performance than the rendezvous that
usually requires introduction of an additional task to manage the shared
data. The use of unprotected shared variables is more error-prone than
the protected objects or rendezvous because the programmer must ensure
that the unprotected shared variables are independently addressable and
that the actions of reading or updating the same unprotected shared
variable are sequential (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §9.10; Rationale
1995, §II.9).

The first example above has a race condition requiring perfect
interleaving of execution. This code can be made more reliable by
introducing a flag that is set by Spool\_Server and reset by
Line\_Printer\_Driver. An if (condition flag) then delay ... else would
be added to each task loop in order to ensure that the interleaving is
satisfied. However, notice that this approach requires a delay and the
associated rescheduling. Presumably, this rescheduling overhead is what
is being avoided by not using the rendezvous.

You might need to use an object in shared memory to communicate data
between (Rationale 1995, §C.5):

  - Ada tasks
  - An Ada program and concurrent non-Ada processes
  - An Ada program and hardware devices

If your environment supports the Systems Programming Annex (Ada
Reference Manual 1995, Annex C), you should indicate whether loads and
stores to the shared object must be indivisible. If you specify the
pragma Atomic, make sure that the object meets the underlying hardware
requirements for size and alignment. Multiple tasks sharing the
predefined random number generator and certain input/output subprograms
can lead to problems with unprotected updates to shared state. The Ada
Reference Manual (1995, §A.5.2) points out the need for tasks to
synchronize their access to the random number generators (packages
Ada.Numerics.Float\_Random and Ada.Numerics.Discrete\_Random). See
Guideline 7.7.5 for the I/O issue.

### Selective Accepts and Entry Calls

#### guideline

  - Use caution with conditional entry calls to task entries.
  - Use caution with selective accept with else parts.
  - Do not depend upon a particular delay in timed entry calls to task
    entries.
  - Do not depend upon a particular delay in selective accepts with
    delay alternatives.
  - Consider using protected objects instead of the rendezvous for
    data-oriented synchronization.

#### example

The conditional entry call in the following code results in a potential
race condition that might degenerate into a busy waiting loop (i.e.,
perform the same calculation over and over). The task Current\_Position
containing entry Request\_New\_Coordinates might never execute if the
loop-containing task (shown in the following code fragment) has a higher
priority than Current\_Position because it does not release the
processing resource:

``` ada
task body Calculate_Flightpath is
begin
   ...
   loop
  
      select
         Current_Position.Request_New_Coordinates (X, Y);
         -- calculate projected location based on new coordinates
         ...
  
      else
         -- calculate projected location based on last locations
         ...
      end select;
  
   end loop;
   ...
end Calculate_Flightpath;
```

The addition of a delay, as shown, may allow Current\_Position to
execute until it reaches an accept for Request\_New\_Coordinates:

``` ada
task body Calculate_Flightpath is
begin
   ...
   loop
  
      select
         Current_Position.Request_New_Coordinates(X, Y);
         -- calculate projected location based on new coordinates
         ...
  
      else
         -- calculate projected location based on last locations
         ...
  
         delay until Time_To_Execute;
         Time_To_Execute := Time_To_Execute + Period;
      end select;
  
   end loop;
   ...
end Calculate_Flightpath;
```

The following selective accept with else again does not degenerate into
a busy wait loop only because of the addition of a delay statement:

``` ada
task body Buffer_Messages is

   ...

begin

   ...

   loop
      delay until Time_To_Execute;

      select
         accept Get_New_Message (Message : in     String) do
            -- copy message to parameters
            ...
         end Get_New_Message;
      else  -- Don't wait for rendezvous
         -- perform built in test Functions
         ...
      end select;

      Time_To_Execute := Time_To_Execute + Period;
   end loop;

   ...

end Buffer_Messages;
```

The following timed entry call might be considered an unacceptable
implementation if lost communications with the reactor for over 25
milliseconds results in a critical situation:

``` ada
task body Monitor_Reactor is
   ...
begin
   ...
   loop
  
      select
         Reactor.Status(OK);
  
      or
         delay 0.025;
         -- lost communication for more that 25 milliseconds
         Emergency_Shutdown;
      end select;
  
      -- process reactor status
      ...
   end loop;
   ...
end Monitor_Reactor;
```

In the following "selective accept with delay" example, the accuracy of
the coordinate calculation function is bounded by time. For example, the
required accuracy cannot be obtained unless Period is within + or -
0.005 seconds. This period cannot be guaranteed because of the
inaccuracy of the delay statement:

``` ada
task body Current_Position is
begin
   ...
   loop
  
      select
         accept Request_New_Coordinates (X :    out Integer;
                                         Y :    out Integer) do
            -- copy coordinates to parameters
            ...
         end Request_New_Coordinates;
  
      or
         delay until Time_To_Execute;
      end select;
  
      Time_To_Execute := Time_To_Execute + Period;
      -- Read Sensors
      -- execute coordinate transformations
   end loop;
   ...
end Current_Position;
```

#### rationale

Use of these constructs always poses a risk of race conditions. Using
them in loops, particularly with poorly chosen task priorities , can
have the effect of busy waiting.

These constructs are very much implementation dependent. For conditional
entry calls and selective accepts with else parts, the Ada Reference
Manual (1995, §9.7) does not define "immediately." For timed entry calls
and selective accepts with delay alternatives, implementors might have
ideas of time that differ from each other and from your own. Like the
delay statement, the delay alternative on the select construct might
wait longer than the time required (see Guideline 6.1.7).

Protected objects offer an efficient means for providing data-oriented
synchronization. Operations on protected objects incur less execution
overhead than tasks and are more efficient for data synchronization and
communication than the rendezvous. See Guideline 6.1.1 for an example of
this use of protected objects.

### Communication Complexity

#### guideline

  - Minimize the number of accept and select statements per task .
  - Minimize the number of accept statements per entry.

#### example

Use:

``` ada
accept A;
if Mode_1 then
   -- do one thing
else  -- Mode_2
   -- do something different
end if;
```

rather than:

``` ada
if Mode_1 then
   accept A;
   -- do one thing
else  -- Mode_2
   accept A;
   -- do something different
end if;
```

#### rationale

This guideline reduces conceptual complexity. Only entries necessary to
understand externally observable task behavior should be introduced. If
there are several different accept and select statements that do not
modify task behavior in a way important to the user of the task, there
is unnecessary complexity introduced by the proliferation of
select/accept statements. Externally observable behavior important to
the task user includes task timing behavior, task rendezvous initiated
by the entry calls, prioritization of entries, or data updates (where
data is shared between tasks).

#### notes

Sanden (1994) argues that you need to trade off the complexity of the
guards associated with the accept statements against the number of
select/accept statements. Sanden (1994) shows an example of a queue
controller for bank tellers where there are two modes, open and closed.
You can implement this scenario with one loop and two select statements,
one for the open mode and the other for the closed mode. Although you
are using more select/accept statements, Sanden (1994) argues that the
resulting program is easier to understand and verify.

## Termination

The ability of tasks to interact with each other using Ada's intertask
communication features makes it especially important to manage planned
or unplanned (e.g., in response to a catastrophic exception condition)
termination in a disciplined way. To do otherwise can lead to a
proliferation of undesired and unpredictable side effects as a result of
the termination of a single task. The guidelines on termination focus on
the termination of tasks. Wherever possible, you should use protected
objects (see Guideline 6.1.1), thus avoiding the termination problems
associated with tasks.

### Avoiding Undesired Termination

#### guideline

  - Consider using an exception handler for a rendezvous within the main
    loop inside each task.

#### example

In the following example, an exception raised using the primary sensor
is used to change Mode to Degraded still allowing execution of the
system:

``` ada
...
loop

   Recognize_Degraded_Mode:
      begin

         case Mode is
            when Primary =>
               select
                  Current_Position_Primary.Request_New_Coordinates (X, Y);
               or
                  delay 0.25;
                  -- Decide whether to switch modes;
               end select;

            when Degraded =>

               Current_Position_Backup.Request_New_Coordinates (X, Y);

         end case;

         ...
      exception
         when Tasking_Error | Program_Error =>
            Mode := Degraded;
      end Recognize_Degraded_Mode;

end loop;
...
```

#### rationale

Allowing a task to terminate might not support the requirements of the
system. Without an exception handler for the rendezvous within the main
task loop, the functions of the task might not be performed.

#### notes

The use of an exception handler is the only way to guarantee recovery
from an entry call to an abnormal task. Use of the 'Terminated attribute
to test a task's availability before making the entry call can introduce
a race condition where the tested task fails after the test but before
the entry call (see Guideline 6.2.3).

### Normal Termination

#### guideline

  - Do not create nonterminating tasks unintentionally.
  - Explicitly shut down tasks that depend on library packages.
  - Confirm that a task is terminated before freeing it with
    Ada.Unchecked\_Deallocation.
  - Consider using a select statement with a terminate alternative
    rather than an accept statement alone.
  - Consider providing a terminate alternative for every selective
    accept that does not require an else part or a delay .
  - Do not declare or create a task within a user-defined Finalize
    procedure after the environment task has finished waiting for other
    tasks.

#### example

This task will never terminate:

``` ada
---------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Message_Buffer is
   ...
begin  -- Message_Buffer
   loop
      select
         when Head /= Tail => -- Circular buffer not empty
            accept Retrieve (Value :    out Element) do
               ...
            end Retrieve;
              
      or
         when not ((Head  = Index'First and then
                    Tail  = Index'Last) or else
                   (Head /= Index'First and then
                    Tail  = Index'Pred(Head))    )
                 => -- Circular buffer not full
            accept Store (Value : in     Element);
      end select;
   end loop;
...
end Message_Buffer;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

The implicit environment task does not terminate until all other tasks
have terminated. The environment task serves as a master for all other
tasks created as part of the execution of the partition; it awaits
termination of all such tasks in order to perform finalization of any
remaining objects of the partition. Thus, a partition will exist until
all library tasks are terminated.

A nonterminating task is a task whose body consists of a nonterminating
loop with no selective accept with terminate or a task that depends on a
library package. Execution of a subprogram or block containing a task
cannot complete until the task terminates. Any task that calls a
subprogram containing a nonterminating task will be delayed
indefinitely.

A task that depends on a library package cannot be forced to terminate
using a selective accept construct with alternative and should be
terminated explicitly during program shutdown. One way to explicitly
shut down tasks that depend on library packages is to provide them with
exit entries and have the main subprogram call the exit entry just
before it terminates.

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, §13.11.2) states that a bounded error
results from freeing a discriminated, unterminated task object. The
danger lies in deallocating the discriminants as a result of freeing the
task object. The effect of unterminated tasks containing bounded errors
at the end of program execution is undefined.

Execution of an accept statement or of a selective accept statement
without an else part, a delay, or a terminate alternative cannot proceed
if no task ever calls the entry(s) associated with that statement. This
could result in deadlock. Following the guideline to provide a terminate
alternative for every selective accept without an else or a delay
entails programming multiple termination points in the task body. A
reader can easily "know where to look" for the normal termination points
in a task body. The termination points are the end of the body's
sequence of statements and alternatives to select statements.

When the environment task has been terminated, either normally or
abnormally, the language does not specify whether to await a task
activated during finalization of the controlled objects in a partition.
While the environment task is waiting for all other tasks in the
partition to complete, starting up a new task during finalization
results in a bounded error (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §10.2). The
exception Program\_Error can be raised during creation or activation of
such a task.

#### exceptions

If you are implementing a cyclic executive, you might need a scheduling
task that does not terminate. It has been said that no real-time system
should be programmed to terminate. This is extreme. Systematic shutdown
of many real-time systems is a desirable safety feature.

If you are considering programming a task not to terminate, be certain
that it is not a dependent of a block or subprogram from which the
task's caller(s) will ever expect to return. Because entire programs can
be candidates for reuse (see Chapter 8), note that the task (and
whatever it depends upon) will not terminate. Also be certain that for
any other task that you do wish to terminate, its termination does not
await this task's termination. Reread and fully understand the Ada
Reference Manual (1995, §9.3) on "Task Dependence-Termination of Tasks."

### The Abort Statement

#### guideline

  - Avoid using the abort statement.
  - Consider using the asynchronous select statement rather than the
    abort statement.
  - Minimize uses of the asynchronous select statement.
  - Avoid assigning nonatomic global objects from a task or from the
    abortable part of an asynchronous select statement.

#### example

If required in the application, provide a task entry for orderly
shutdown.

The following example of asynchronous transfer of control shows a
database transaction. The database operation may be cancelled (through a
special input key) unless the commit transaction has begun. The code is
extracted from the Rationale (1995, §9.4):

``` ada
with Ada.Finalization;
package Txn_Pkg is
   type Txn_Status is (Incomplete, Failed, Succeeded);
   type Transaction is new Ada.Finalization.Limited_Controlled with private;
   procedure Finalize (Txn : in out transaction);
   procedure Set_Status (Txn    : in out Transaction;
                         Status : in     Txn_Status);
private
   type Transaction is new Ada.Finalization.Limited_Controlled with
      record
         Status : Txn_Status := Incomplete;
         pragma Atomic (Status);
         . . . -- More components
      end record;
end Txn_Pkg;
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
package body Txn_Pkg is
   procedure Finalize (Txn : in out Transaction) is
   begin
      -- Finalization runs with abort and ATC deferred
      if Txn.Status = Succeeded then
         Commit (Txn);
      else
         Rollback (Txn);
      end if;
   end Finalize;
   . . . -- body of procedure Set_Status
end Txn_Pkg;
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-- sample code block showing how Txn_Pkg could be used:
declare
   Database_Txn : Transaction;
   -- declare a transaction, will commit or abort during finalization
begin
   select  -- wait for a cancel key from the input device
      Input_Device.Wait_For_Cancel;
      -- the Status remains Incomplete, so that the transaction will not commit
   then abort  -- do the transaction
      begin
         Read (Database_Txn, . . .);
         Write (Database_Txn, . . .);
         . . .
         Set_Status (Database_Txn, Succeeded);
         -- set status to ensure the transaction is committed
      exception
         when others =>
            Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line ("Operation failed with unhandled exception:");
            Set_Status (Database_Txn, Failed);
      end;
   end select;
   -- Finalize on Database_Txn will be called here and, based on the recorded
   -- status, will either commit or abort the transaction.
end;
```

#### rationale

When an abort statement is executed, there is no way to know what the
targeted task was doing beforehand. Data for which the target task is
responsible might be left in an inconsistent state. The overall effect
on the system of aborting a task in such an uncontrolled way requires
careful analysis. The system design must ensure that all tasks depending
on the aborted task can detect the termination and respond
appropriately.

Tasks are not aborted until they reach an abort completion point such as
beginning or end of elaboration, a delay statement, an accept statement,
an entry call, a select statement, task allocation, or the execution of
an exception handler. Consequently, the abort statement might not
release processor resources as soon as you might expect. It also might
not stop a runaway task because the task might be executing an infinite
loop containing no abort completion points. There is no guarantee that a
task will not abort until an abort completion point in multiprocessor
systems, but the task will almost always stop running right away.

An asynchronous select statement allows an external event to cause a
task to begin execution at a new point, without having to abort and
restart the task (Rationale 1995, §9.3). Because the triggering
statement and the abortable statement execute in parallel until one of
them completes and forces the other to be abandoned, you need only one
thread of control. The asynchronous select statement improves
maintainability because the abortable statements are clearly delimited
and the transfer cannot be mistakenly redirected.

In task bodies and in the abortable part of an asynchronous select, you
should avoid assigning to nonatomic global objects, primarily because of
the risk of an abort occurring before the nonatomic assignment
completes. If you have one or more abort statements in your application
and the assignment is disrupted, the target object can become abnormal,
and subsequent uses of the object lead to erroneous execution (Ada
Reference Manual 1995, §9.8). In the case of scalar objects, you can use
the attribute 'Valid, but there is no equivalent attribute for nonscalar
objects. (See Guideline 5.9.1 for a discussion of the 'Valid attribute.)
You also can still safely assign to local objects and call operations of
global protected objects.

### Abnormal Termination

#### guideline

  - Place an exception handler for others at the end of a task body.
  - Consider having each exception handler at the end of a task body
    report the task's demise.
  - Do not rely on the task status to determine whether a rendezvous can
    be made with the task.

#### example

This is one of many tasks updating the positions of blips on a radar
screen. When started, it is given part of the name by which its parent
knows it. Should it terminate due to an exception, it signals the fact
in one of its parent's data structures:

``` ada
task type Track (My_Index : Track_Index) is
   ...
end Track;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
task body Track is
     Neutral : Boolean := True;
begin  -- Track
   select
      accept ...
      ...
   or
      terminate;
   end select;
   ...
exception
   when others =>
      if not Neutral then
         Station(My_Index).Status := Dead;
      end if;
end Track;
---------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

A task will terminate if an exception is raised within it for which it
has no handler. In such a case, the exception is not propagated outside
of the task (unless it occurs during a rendezvous). The task simply dies
with no notification to other tasks in the program. Therefore, providing
exception handlers within the task, and especially a handler for others,
ensures that a task can regain control after an exception occurs. If the
task cannot proceed normally after handling an exception, this affords
it the opportunity to shut itself down cleanly and to notify tasks
responsible for error recovery necessitated by the abnormal termination
of the task.

You should not use the task status to determine whether a rendezvous can
be made with the task. If Task A depends on Task B and Task A checks the
status flag before it rendezvouses with Task B, there is a potential
that Task B fails between the status test and the rendezvous. In this
case, Task A must provide an exception handler to handle the
Tasking\_Error exception raised by the call to an entry of an abnormal
task (see Guideline 6.3.1).

### Circular Task Calls

#### guideline

  - Do not call a task entry that directly or indirectly results in a
    call to an entry of the original calling task.

#### rationale

A software failure known as task deadlock will occur if a task calls one
of its own entries directly or indirectly via a circular chain of calls.

### Setting Exit Status

#### guideline

  - Avoid race conditions in setting an exit status code from the main
    program when using the procedure
    Ada.Command\_Line.Set\_Exit\_Status.
  - In a program with multiple tasks, encapsulate, serialize, and check
    calls to the procedure Ada.Command\_Line.Set\_Exit\_Status.

#### rationale

In accordance with the rules of Ada, tasks in library-level packages may
terminate after the main program task. If the program permits multiple
tasks to use Set\_Exit\_Status, then there can be no guarantee that any
particular status value is the one actually returned.

## Summary

### concurrency options

  - Consider using protected objects to provide mutually exclusive
    access to data.
  - Consider using protected objects to control or synchronize access to
    data shared by multiple tasks .
  - Consider using protected objects to implement synchronization, such
    as a passive resource monitor.
  - Consider encapsulating protected objects in the private part or body
    of a package.
  - Consider using a protected procedure to implement an interrupt
    handler.
  - Do not attach a protected procedure handler to a hardware interrupt
    if that interrupt has a maximum priority greater than the ceiling
    priority assigned to the handler.
  - Avoid the use of global variables in entry barriers.
  - Avoid the use of barrier expressions with side effects.
  - Use tasks to model selected asynchronous threads of control within
    the problem domain.
  - Consider using tasks to define concurrent algorithms.
  - Consider using rendezvous when your application requires synchronous
    unbuffered communication.
  - Consider using discriminants to minimize the need for an explicit
    initialization operation (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider using discriminants to control composite components of the
    protected objects, including setting the size of an entry family
    (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider using a discriminant to set the priority of a protected
    object (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider using a discriminant to identify an interrupt to a
    protected object (Rationale 1995, §9.1).
  - Consider declaring a task type with a discriminant to indicate
    (Rationale 1995, §9.6):
      - Priority, storage size, and size of entry families of individual
        tasks of a type
      - Data associated with a task (through an access discriminant)
  - Consider using single task declarations to declare unique instances
    of concurrent tasks.
  - Consider using single protected declarations to declare unique
    instances of protected objects.
  - Minimize dynamic creation of tasks because of the potentially high
    startup overhead; reuse tasks by having them wait for new work on
    some appropriate entry queue.
  - Do not rely on pragma Priority unless your compiler supports the
    Real-Time Annex (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex D) and priority
    scheduling.
  - Minimize risk of priority inversion by use of protected objects and
    ceiling priority.
  - Do not rely upon task priorities to achieve a particular sequence of
    task execution.
  - Do not depend on a particular delay being achievable (Nissen and
    Wallis 1984).
  - Use a delay until not a delay statement to delay until a specific
    time has been reached.
  - Avoid using a busy waiting loop instead of a delay.
  - Carefully consider the placement of components of protected types
    within a tagged type inheritance hierarchy.
  - Consider using generics to provide extensibility of data types
    requiring the restrictions provided by protected objects.

### communication

  - Minimize the work performed during a rendezvous .
  - Minimize the work performed in the selective accept loop of a task.
  - Consider using protected objects for data synchronization and
    communication.
  - Provide a handler for exception Program\_Error whenever you cannot
    avoid a selectiveaccept statement whose alternatives can all be
    closed (Honeywell 1986).
  - Make systematic use of handlers for Tasking\_Error.
  - Be prepared to handle exceptions during a rendezvous .
  - Consider using a when others exception handler.
  - Do not depend on the values of the task attributes 'Callable or
    'Terminated (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
  - Do not depend on attributes to avoid Tasking\_Error on an entry
    call.
  - For tasks, do not depend on the value of the entry attribute 'Count.
  - Using the 'Count attribute with protected entries is more reliable
    than using the 'Count attribute with task entries.
  - Use calls on protected subprograms or entries to pass data between
    tasks rather than unprotected shared variables.
  - Do not use unprotected shared variables as a task synchronization
    device.
  - Do not reference nonlocal variables in a guard .
  - If an unprotected shared variable is necessary, use the pragma
    Volatile or Atomic.
  - Use caution with conditional entry calls to task entries.
  - Use caution with selective accepts with else parts.
  - Do not depend upon a particular delay in timed entry calls to task
    entries.
  - Do not depend upon a particular delay in selective accepts with
    delay alternatives.
  - Consider using protected objects instead of the rendezvous for
    data-oriented synchronization.
  - Minimize the number of accept and select statements per task .
  - Minimize the number of accept statements per entry.

### termination

  - Consider using an exception handler for a rendezvous within the main
    loop inside each task.
  - Do not create nonterminating tasks unintentionally.
  - Explicitly shut down tasks that depend on library packages.
  - Confirm that a task is terminated before freeing it with
    Ada.Unchecked\_Deallocation.
  - Consider using a select statement with a terminate alternative
    rather than an accept statement alone.
  - Consider providing a terminate alternative for every selective
    accept that does not require an else part or a delay.
  - Do not declare or create a task within a user-defined Finalize
    procedure after the environment task has finished waiting for other
    tasks.
  - Avoid using the abort statement.
  - Consider using the asynchronous select statement rather than the
    abort statement.
  - Minimize uses of the asynchronous select statement.
  - Avoid assigning nonatomic global objects from a task or from the
    abortable part of an asynchronous select statement.
  - Place an exception handler for others at the end of a task body.
  - Consider having each exception handler at the end of a task body
    report the task's demise.
  - Do not rely on the task status to determine whether a rendezvous can
    be made with the task.
  - Do not call a task entry that directly or indirectly results in a
    call to an entry of the original calling task.
  - Avoid race conditions in setting an exit status code from the main
    program when using the procedure
    Ada.Command\_Line.Set\_Exit\_Status.
  - In a program with multiple tasks, encapsulate, serialize, and check
    calls to the procedure Ada.Command\_Line.Set\_Exit\_Status.
:::note

This page of the "Ada Quality and Style Guide" has been adapted from the
original work at https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide, which is
licensed under the
[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/);
additional terms may apply.  Page not endorsed by Wikibooks or the Ada
Style Guide Wikibook authors. This page is licensed under the same license
as the original work.

:::
