---
title: Portability
sidebar_position: 7
---

Discussions concerning portability usually concentrate on the
differences in computer systems, but the development and run-time
environment may also change:

  - portability (software)  
    The ease with which software can be transferred from one computer
    system or environment to another (IEEE Dictionary 1984).

Most portability problems are not pure language issues. Portability
involves hardware (byte order, device I/O) and software (utility
libraries, operating systems, run-time libraries). This chapter will not
address these challenging design issues.

This chapter does identify the more common portability problems that are
specific to Ada when moving from one platform or compiler to another. It
also suggests ways that nonportable code can be isolated. By using the
implementation hiding features of Ada, the cost of porting can be
significantly reduced.

In fact, many language portability issues are solved by the strict
definition of the Ada language itself. In most programming languages,
different dialects are prevalent as vendors extend or dilute a language
for various reasons: conformance to a programming environment or
features for a particular application domain. The Ada Compiler
Validation Capability (ACVC) was developed by the U.S. Department of
Defense at the Ada Validation Facility, ASD/SIDL, Wright-Patterson Air
Force Base, to ensure that implementors strictly adhered to the Ada
standard.

As part of the strict definition of Ada, certain constructs are defined
to be erroneous, and the effect of executing an erroneous construct is
unpredictable. Therefore, erroneous constructs are obviously not
portable. Erroneous constructs and bounded errors are discussed in
Guideline 5.9.10 and are not repeated in this chapter.

Most programmers new to the language expect Ada to eliminate all
portability problems; it definitely does not. Certain areas of Ada are
not yet covered by validation. The definition of Ada leaves certain
details to the implementor. The compiler implementor's choices, with
respect to these details, affect portability.

The revisions to the Ada language approved in the 1995 standard generate
a new area of portability concerns. Some programs are intended to have a
long life and may start in Ada 83 (Ada Reference Manual 1983) but
transition to Ada 95 (Ada Reference Manual 1995). Although this style
guide focuses on the current Ada standard and does not address
transition issues, there are portability issues relating to using
certain features of the language. These issues revolve around the
language features designated as obsolescent in Annex J of the Ada
Reference Manual (1995).

The constructs of the language have been developed to satisfy a series
of needs. These constructs can legitimately be used even though they may
impact portability. There are some general principles to enhancing
portability that are exemplified by many of the guidelines in this
chapter. They are:

  - Recognize those Ada constructs that may adversely affect portability
    on the relevant implementations or platforms.
  - Rely on those Ada constructs that depend on characteristics shared
    by all relevant implementations. Avoid the use of those constructs
    whose implementation characteristics vary on the relevant platforms.
  - Localize and encapsulate nonportable features of a program if their
    use is essential.
  - Highlight the use of constructs that may cause portability problems.

These guidelines cannot be applied thoughtlessly. Many of them involve a
detailed understanding of the Ada model and its implementation. In many
cases, you will have to make carefully considered tradeoffs between
efficiency and portability. Reading this chapter should improve your
insight into the tradeoffs involved. The material in this chapter was
largely acquired from three sources: the Ada Run-Time Environments
Working Group (ARTEWG) Catalogue of Ada Runtime Implementation
Dependencies (ARTEWG 1986); the Nissen and Wallis book on Portability
and Style in Ada (Nissen and Wallis 1984); and a paper written for the
U.S. Air Force by SofTech on Ada Portability Guidelines (Pappas 1985).
The last of these sources (Pappas 1985) encompasses the other two and
provides an in-depth explanation of the issues, numerous examples, and
techniques for minimizing portability problems. Conti (1987) is a
valuable reference for understanding the latitude allowed for
implementors of Ada and the criteria often used to make decisions.

This chapter's purpose is to provide a summary of portability issues in
the guideline format of this book. The chapter does not include all
issues identified in the references but only the most significant. For
an in-depth presentation, see Pappas (1985). A few additional guidelines
are presented here and others are elaborated upon where applicable. For
further reading on Ada I/O portability issues, see Matthews (1987),
Griest (1989), and CECOM (1989).

Some of the guidelines in this chapter cross reference and place
stricter constraints on other guidelines in this book. These constraints
apply when portability is being emphasized.

Guidelines in this chapter are frequently worded "consider . . ."
because hard and fast rules cannot apply in all situations. The specific
choice you make in a given situation involves design tradeoffs. The
rationale for these guidelines is intended to give you insight into some
of these tradeoffs.

## Fundamentals

This section introduces some generally applicable principles of writing
portable Ada programs. It includes guidelines about the assumptions you
should make with respect to a number of Ada features and their
implementations and guidelines about the use of other Ada features to
ensure maximum portability.

### Obsolescent Features

#### guideline

  - In programs or components intended to have a long life, avoid using
    the features of Ada declared as "obsolescent" by Annex J of the Ada
    Reference Manual (1995), unless the use of the feature is needed for
    backward compatibility with Ada 83 (Ada Reference Manual 1983).
  - Document the use of any obsolescent features.
  - Avoid using the following features:
      - The short renamings of the packages in the predefined
        environment (e.g., Text\_IO as opposed to Ada.Text\_IO)
      - The character replacements of \! for |, : for \#, and % for
        quotation marks
      - Reduced accuracy subtypes of floating-point types
      - The 'Constrained attribute as applied to private types
      - The predefined package ASCII
      - The exception Numeric\_Error
      - Various representation specifications, including at clauses, mod
        clauses, interrupt entries, and the Storage\_Size attribute

#### rationale

Ten years of reflection on the use of Ada 83 led to the conclusion that
some features of the original language are not as useful as originally
intended. These features have been replaced with others in the Ada 95
revision. It would have been desirable to remove the obsolescent
features completely, but that would have prevented the upward compatible
transition of programs from Ada 83 to Ada 95. Thus, the obsolescent
features remain in the language and are explicitly labeled as such in
Annex J of the Ada Reference Manual (1995). The features listed in Annex
J are candidates for removal from the language during its next revision.
If a program's lifetime may extend beyond the next language revision, it
should avoid the obsolescent language features unless backward
compatibility with Ada 83 forces their use.

#### exceptions

When you instantiate Ada.Text\_IO.Float\_IO, the values of the
Default\_Fore and Default\_Aft fields are set from the values of the
'Fore and 'Aft attributes of the actual floating-point type used in the
instantiation. If you declare a reduced accuracy floating-point type
that you then use to instantiate Ada.Text\_IO.Float\_IO, the output
field widths are determined from the reduced accuracy type, although the
implementation accuracy is unchanged (Rationale 1995, ยง3.3).

### Global Assumptions

#### guideline

  - Make informed assumptions about the support provided for the
    following on potential target platforms:
      - Number of bits available for type Integer (range constraints)
      - Number of decimal digits of precision available for
        floating-point types
      - Number of bits available for fixed-point types (delta and range
        constraints)
      - Number of characters per line of source text
      - Number of bits for Root\_Integer expressions
      - Number of seconds for the range of Duration
      - Number of milliseconds for Duration'Small
      - Minimum and maximum scale for decimal types
  - Avoid assumptions about the values and the number of values included
    in the type Character.

#### instantiation

  - These are minimum values (or minimum precision in the case of
    Duration'Small) that a project or application might assume that an
    implementation provides. There is no guarantee that a given
    implementation provides more than the minimum, so these would be
    treated by the project or application as maximum values also.
      - 16 bits available for type Integer (-2\*\*15 .. 2\*\*15 - 1)
      - 6 decimal digits of precision available for floating-point types
      - 24 bits available for fixed-point types
      - 200 characters per line of source text
      - 16 bits for expressions
      - \-86\_400 .. 86\_400 seconds (1 day) for the range of Duration
        (as specified in Ada Reference Manual \[1995, ยง9.6\])
      - 20 milliseconds for Duration'Small (as specified in Ada
        Reference Manual \[1995, ยง9.6\])

#### rationale

Some assumptions must be made with respect to certain
implementation-specific values. The exact values assumed should cover
the majority of the target equipment of interest. Choosing the lowest
common denominator for values improves portability. Implementations may
supply an alternate character set specific to a locale or environment.
For instance, the implementation on an IBM-compatible PC may support
that machine's native character set rather than Latin 1. As a result,
some character values may or may not be supported, for example, the
smiley face.

#### notes

Of the microcomputers currently available for incorporation within
embedded systems, 16-bit and 32-bit processors are prevalent. Using
current representation schemes, 6 decimal digits of floating point
accuracy imply a representation mantissa at least 21 bits wide, leaving
11 bits for exponent and sign within a 32-bit representation. This
correlates with the data widths of floating point hardware currently
available for the embedded systems market. A 32-bit minimum on
fixed-point numbers correlates with the accuracy and storage
requirements of floating point numbers. The 16-bit example for
Root\_Integer expressions matches that for Integer storage. (The 32-bit
integers can be assumed if the application will only be considered for
32-bit processors with a corresponding 32-bit operating system and
supporting compiler.)

The values for the range and accuracy of values of the predefined type
Duration are the limits expressed in the Ada Reference Manual (1995,
ยง9.6). You should not expect an implementation to provide a wider range
or a finer granularity.

A standard-mode Ada character set of Latin 1 can be assumed in most
cases for the contents and internal behavior of type Character and
packages Character.Latin\_1, Character.Handling, and Strings.Maps.
However, this does not mean that the target hardware platform is capable
of displaying the entire character set. You should not use a nonstandard
Ada character set unless intentionally producing a nonportable user
interface with a specific purpose.

### Comments

#### guideline

  - Use highlighting comments for each package, subprogram, and task
    where any nonportable features are present.
  - For each nonportable feature employed, describe the expectations for
    that feature.

#### example

``` ada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
package Memory_Mapped_IO is
   -- WARNING - This package is implementation specific.
   -- It uses absolute memory addresses to interface with the I/O
   -- system. It assumes a particular printer's line length.
   -- Change memory mapping and printer details when porting.
   Printer_Line_Length : constant := 132;
   type Data is array (1 .. Printer_Line_Length) of Character;
   procedure Write_Line (Line : in     Data);
end Memory_Mapped_IO;
------------------------------------------------------------------------
with System;
with System.Storage_Elements;
package body Memory_Mapped_IO is
   -- WARNING: Implementation specific memory address

   Buffer_Address : constant System.Address
      := System.Storage_Elements.To_Address(16#200#);

   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
   procedure Write_Line (Line : in     Data) is
      Buffer : Data;
      for Buffer'Address use Buffer_Address;

   begin  -- Write_Line
       -- perform output operation through specific memory locations.
       ...
   end Write_Line;
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
end Memory_Mapped_IO;
------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

Explicitly commenting each breach of portability will raise its
visibility and aid in the porting process. A description of the
nonportable feature's expectations covers the common case where vendor
documentation of the original implementation is not available to the
person performing the porting process.

### Main Subprogram

#### guideline

  - Consider using only a parameterless procedure as the main
    subprogram.
  - Consider using Ada.Command\_Line for accessing values from the
    environment, but recognize that this package's behavior and even its
    specification are nonportable (see Guideline 7.1.6).
  - Encapsulate and document all uses of package Ada.Command\_Line.

#### example

The following example encapsulates the arguments for a hypothetical
"execution mode" argument passed from the environment. It encapsulates
both the expected position and the expected values of the argument, as
well as provides a default in cases where the environment was unable to
provide the information:

``` ada
package Environment is

   type Execution_Mode is (Unspecified, Interactive, Batch);

   function Execution_Argument return Execution_Mode;

   ...

end Environment;

----------------------------------------------------------------------

with Ada.Command_Line;       use Ada.Command_Line;
with Ada.Strings.Unbounded;  use Ada.Strings.Unbounded;

package body Environment is

   function Execution_Argument return Execution_Mode is

      Execution_Argument_Number : constant := 1;

      Interactive_Mode_String : constant String := "-i";
      Batch_Mode_String       : constant String := "-b";

   begin
      if Argument_Count < Execution_Argument_Number then
         return Unspecified;
      elsif To_Unbounded_String (Argument (Execution_Argument_Number)) =
               Interactive_Mode_String then
         return Interactive;
      elsif To_Unbounded_String (Argument (Execution_Argument_Number)) =
               Batch_Mode_String then
         return Batch;
      else
         return Unspecified;
      end if;
   end Execution_Argument;

end Environment;
```

#### rationale

The predefined language environment declares the package
Ada.Command\_Line, providing a standardized way for a program to obtain
the values of a command line. Because all Ada compilers must implement
the packages in the predefined language environment, you can create a
program that is more portable, maintainable, and readable by using this
package. You should, however, be aware that even though the language
defines the objects and type profiles of this package, it does not force
a relationship between the function results and any other entity or
operation, and thus, allows the possibility of a nonportable behavior
and specification.

The value returned by the function Ada.Command\_Line.Argument\_Count is
implementation-dependent. Different operating systems follow different
conventions regarding the parsing and meaning of command line
parameters. To enhance your program's portability, assume the simplest
case: that the external execution environment does not support passing
arguments to a program.

Some operating systems are capable of acquiring and interpreting
returned integer values near 0 from a function, but many others cannot.
Further, many real-time, embedded systems will not be designed to
terminate, so a function or a procedure having parameters with modes out
or in out will be inappropriate to such applications.

This leaves procedures with in parameters. Although some operating
systems can pass parameters into a program as it starts, others are not.
Also, an implementation may not be able to perform type checking on such
parameters even if the surrounding environment is capable of providing
them.

#### notes

Real-time, embedded applications may not have an "operator" initiating
the program to supply the parameters, in which case it would be more
appropriate for the program to have been compiled with a package
containing the appropriate constant values or for the program to read
the necessary values from switch settings or a downloaded auxiliary
file. In any case, the variation in surrounding initiating environments
is far too great to depend upon the kind of last-minute (program)
parameterization implied by (subprogram) parameters to the main
subprogram. POSIX 5 provides a standard operating system command line
interface that might be a more appropriate alternative to the Ada
command line facility depending on the implementation family of an
application.

### Encapsulating Implementation Dependencies

#### guideline

  - Create packages specifically designed to isolate hardware and
    implementation dependencies and designed so that their specification
    will not change when porting.
  - Clearly indicate the objectives if machine or solution efficiency is
    the reason for hardware or implementation-dependent code.
  - For the packages that hide implementation dependencies, maintain
    different package bodies for different target environments.
  - Isolate interrupt receiving tasks into implementation-dependent
    packages.
  - Refer to Annex M of the Ada Reference Manual (1995) for a list of
    implementation-dependent features.

#### example

See Guideline 7.1.3.

#### rationale

Encapsulating hardware and implementation dependencies in a package
allows the remainder of the code to ignore them and, thus, to be fully
portable. It also localizes the dependencies, making it clear exactly
which parts of the code may need to change when porting the program.

Some implementation-dependent features may be used to achieve particular
performance or efficiency objectives. Commenting these objectives
ensures that the programmer can find an appropriate way to achieve them
when porting to a different implementation or explicitly recognize that
they cannot be achieved.

Interrupt entries are implementation-dependent features that may not be
supported (e.g., VAX Ada uses pragmas to assign system traps to "normal"
rendezvous). However, interrupt entries cannot be avoided in most
embedded, real-time systems, and it is reasonable to assume that they
are supported by an Ada implementation. The value for an interrupt is
implementation-defined. Isolate it.

#### notes

You can use Ada to write machine-dependent programs that take advantage
of an implementation in a manner consistent with the Ada model but that
make particular choices where Ada allows implementation freedom. These
machine dependencies should be treated in the same way as any other
implementation-dependent features of the code.

### Implementation-Added Features

#### guideline

  - Avoid the use of vendor-supplied packages.
  - Avoid the use of features added to the predefined packages that are
    not specified in the Ada language definition or Specialized Needs
    Annexes.

#### rationale

Vendor-added features are not likely to be provided by other
implementations. Even if a majority of vendors eventually provide
similar additional features, they are unlikely to have identical
formulations. Indeed, different vendors may use the same formulation for
(semantically) entirely different features. See Guideline 7.5.2 for
further information on vendor-supplied exceptions.

Ada has introduced a number of new pragmas and attributes that were not
present in Ada 83 (Ada Reference Manual 1983). These new pragmas and
attributes may clash with implementation-defined pragmas and attributes.

#### exceptions

There are many kinds of applications that require the use of these
features. Examples include multilingual systems that standardize on a
vendor's file system, applications that are closely integrated with
vendor products (i.e., user interfaces), and embedded systems for
performance reasons. Isolate the use of these features into packages.

If a vendor-supplied package is provided in compilable source code form,
use of the package does not make a program nonportable provided that the
package does not contain any nonportable code and can be lawfully
included in your program.

### Specialized Needs Annexes

#### guideline

  - Use features defined in the Specialized Needs Annexes rather than
    vendor-defined features.
  - Document clearly the use of any features from the Specialized Needs
    Annexes (systems programming, real-time systems, distributed
    systems, information systems, numerics, and safety and security).

#### rationale

The Specialized Needs Annexes define standards for specific application
areas without extending the syntax of the language. You can port a
program with specific domain needs (e.g., distributed systems,
information systems) across vendor implementations more easily if they
support the features standardized in an annex rather than rely on
specific vendor extensions. The purpose of the annexes is to provide a
consistent and uniform way to address issues faced in several
application areas where Ada is expected to be used. Because different
compilers will support different sets of annexes if any, you may have
portability problems if you rely on the features defined in any given
annex.

The Specialized Needs Annexes provide special capabilities that go
beyond the core language definition. Because compilers are not required
to support the special-purpose annexes, you should localize your use of
these features where possible. By documenting their usage, you are
leaving a record of potential porting difficulties for future
programmers.

### Dependence on Parameter Passing Mechanism

#### guideline

  - Do not write code whose correct execution depends on the particular
    parameter passing mechanism used by an implementation (Ada Reference
    Manual 1995, ยง6.2; Cohen 1986).
  - If a subprogram has more than one formal parameter of a given
    subtype, at least one of which is \[in\] out, make sure that the
    subprogram can properly handle the case when both formal parameters
    denote the same actual object.

#### example

The output of this program depends on the particular parameter passing
mechanism that was used:

``` ada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
with Ada.Integer_Text_IO;
procedure Outer is
   type Coordinates is
      record
         X : Integer := 0;
         Y : Integer := 0;
      end record;
   Outer_Point : Coordinates;
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
   procedure Inner (Inner_Point : in out Coordinates) is
   begin
      Inner_Point.X := 5;
      -- The following line causes the output of the program to
      -- depend on the parameter passing mechanism.
      Ada.Integer_Text_IO.Put(Outer_Point.X);
   end Inner;
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
begin  -- Outer
   Ada.Integer_Text_IO.Put(Outer_Point.X);
   Inner(Outer_Point);
   Ada.Integer_Text_IO.Put(Outer_Point.X);
end Outer;
------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

If the parameter passing mechanism is by copy, the results on the
standard output file are:

0 0 5

If the parameter passing mechanism is by reference, the results are:

0 5 5

The following code fragment shows where there is a potential for bounded
error when a procedure is called with actual parameters denoting the
same object:

``` ada
procedure Test_Bounded_Error (Parm_1 : in out    Integer;
                              Parm_2 : in out Integer) is
   procedure Inner (Parm : in out Integer) is
   begin
      Parm := Parm * 10;
   end Inner;
begin
   Parm_2 := 5;
   Inner (Parm_1);
end Test_Bounded_Error;
```

In executing the procedure Test\_Bounded\_Error, both Parm\_1 and
Parm\_2 denote the object Actual\_Parm. After executing the first
statement, the object Actual\_Parm has the value 5. When the procedure
Inner is called, its formal parameter Parm denotes Actual\_Parm. It
cannot be determined whether it denotes the old value of Parm\_1, in
this case 1, or the new value, in this case 5.

``` ada
Actual_Parm : Integer := 1;
...
Test_Bounded_Error (Actual_Parm, Actual_Parm);  -- potential bounded error
```

#### rationale

Certain composite types (untagged records and arrays) can be passed
either by copy or by reference. If there are two or more formal
parameters of the same type, one or more of which is writable, then you
should document whether you assume that these formal parameters do not
denote the same actual object. Similarly, if a subprogram that has a
formal parameter of a given subtype also makes an up-level reference to
an object of this same type, you should document whether you assume that
the formal parameter denotes a different object from the object named in
the up-level reference. In these situations where an object can be
accessed through distinct formal parameter paths, the exception
Program\_Error may be raised, the new value may be read, or the old
value of the object may be used (Ada Reference Manual 1995, ยง6.2).

See also Guideline 8.2.7.

#### exceptions

Frequently, when interfacing Ada to foreign code, dependence on
parameter-passing mechanisms used by a particular implementation is
unavoidable. In this case, isolate the calls to the foreign code in an
interface package that exports operations that do not depend on the
parameter-passing mechanism.

### Arbitrary Order Dependencies

#### guideline

  - Avoid depending on the order in which certain constructs in Ada are
    evaluated.

#### example

The output of this program depends upon the order of evaluation of
subprogram parameters, but the Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยง6.4)
specifies that these evaluations are done in an arbitrary order:

``` ada
package Utilities is
   function Unique_ID return Integer;
end Utilities;

package body Utilities is

   ID : Integer := 0;

   function Unique_ID return Integer is
   begin
      ID := ID + 1;
      return ID;
   end Unique_ID;

end Utilities;

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------
with Ada.Text_IO;
with Utilities; use Utilities;
procedure P is
begin
   Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (Integer'Image(Unique_ID) & Integer'Image(Unique_ID));
end P;
```

If the parameters to the "&" function are evaluated in textual order,
the output is:

1 2

If the parameters are evaluated in the reverse order, the output is:

2 1

#### rationale

The Ada language defines certain evaluations to occur in arbitrary order
(e.g., subprogram parameters). While a dependency on the order of
evaluation may not adversely affect the program on a certain
implementation, the code might not execute correctly when it is ported.
For example, if two actual parameters of a subprogram call have side
effects, the effect of the program could depend on the order of
evaluation (Ada Reference Manual 1995, ยง1.1.4). Avoid arbitrary order
dependencies, but also recognize that even an unintentional error of
this kind could prohibit portability.

## Numeric Types and Expressions

A great deal of care was taken with the design of the Ada features
related to numeric computations to ensure that the language could be
used in embedded systems and mathematical applications where precision
was important. As far as possible, these features were made portable.
However, there is an inevitable tradeoff between maximally exploiting
the available precision of numeric computation on a particular machine
and maximizing the portability of Ada numeric constructs. This means
that these Ada features, particularly numeric types and expressions,
must be used with great care if full portability of the resulting
program is to be guaranteed.

### Predefined Numeric Types

#### guideline

  - Avoid using the predefined numeric types in package Standard. Use
    range and digits declarations and let the implementation pick the
    appropriate representation.
  - For programs that require greater accuracy than that provided by the
    global assumptions, define a package that declares a private type
    and operations as needed; see Pappas (1985) for a full explanation
    and examples.
  - Consider using predefined numeric types (Integer, Natural, Positive)
    for:
      - Indexes into arrays where the index type is not significant,
        such as type String
      - "Pure" numbers, that is, numbers with no associated physical
        unit (e.g., exponents)
      - Values whose purpose is to control a repeat or iteration count

#### example

The second and third examples below are not representable as subranges
of Integer on a machine with a 16-bit word. The first example below
allows a compiler to choose a multiword representation, if necessary.

Use:

``` ada
type    Second_Of_Day is             range 0 .. 86_400;
```

rather than:

``` ada
type    Second_Of_Day is new Integer range 1 .. 86_400;
```

or:

``` ada
subtype Second_Of_Day is     Integer range 1 .. 86_400;
```

#### rationale

An implementor is free to define the range of the predefined numeric
types. Porting code from an implementation with greater accuracy to one
of lesser accuracy is a time consuming and error-prone process. Many of
the errors are not reported until run-time.

This applies to more than just numerical computation. An
easy-to-overlook instance of this problem occurs if you neglect to use
explicitly declared types for integer discrete ranges (array sizes, loop
ranges, etc.) (see Guidelines 5.5.1 and 5.5.2). If you do not provide an
explicit type when specifying index constraints and other discrete
ranges, a predefined integer type is assumed.

The predefined numeric types are useful when you use them wisely. You
should not use them to avoid declaring numeric typesโthen you lose the
benefits of strong typing. When your application deals with different
kinds of quantities and units, you should definitely separate them
through the use of distinct numeric types. However, if you are simply
counting the number of iterations in an iterative approximation
algorithm, declaring a special integer type is probably overkill. The
predefined exponentiation operators \*\* require an integer as the type
of its right operand.

You should use the predefined types Natural and Positive for
manipulating certain kinds of values in the predefined language
environment. The types String and Wide\_String use an index of type
Positive. If your code indexes into a string using an incompatible
integer type, you will be forced to do type conversion, reducing its
readability. If you are performing operations like slices and
concatenation, the subtype of your numeric array index is probably
insignificant and you are better off using a predefined subtype. On the
other hand, if your array represents a table (e.g., a hash table), then
your index subtype is significant, and you should declare a distinct
index type.

#### notes

There is an alternative that this guideline permits. As Guideline 7.1.5
suggests, implementation dependencies can be encapsulated in packages
intended for that purpose. This could include the definition of a 32-bit
integer type. It would then be possible to derive additional types from
that 32-bit type.

### Accuracy Model

#### guideline

  - Use an implementation that supports the Numerics Annex (Ada
    Reference Manual 1995, Annex G) when performance and accuracy are
    overriding concerns.

#### rationale

The Numerics Annex defines the accuracy and performance requirements for
floating- and fixed-point arithmetic. The Annex provides a "strict" mode
in which the compiler must support these requirements. To guarantee that
your program's numerical performance is portable, you should compile and
link in the strict mode. If your program relies upon the numeric
properties of the strict mode, then it will only be portable to other
environments that support the strict numerics mode.

The accuracy of floating-point numbers is based on what machine numbers
can be represented exactly in storage. A computational result in a
register can fall between two machine numbers when the register contains
more bits than storage. You can step through the machine numbers using
the attributes 'Pred and 'Succ. Other attributes return values of the
mantissa, exponent, radix, and other characteristics of floating- and
fixed-point numbers.

### Accuracy Analysis

#### guideline

  - Carefully analyze what accuracy and precision you really need.

#### rationale

Floating-point calculations are done with the equivalent of the
implementation's predefined floating-point types. The effect of extra
"guard" digits in internal computations can sometimes lower the number
of digits that must be specified in an Ada declaration. This may not be
consistent over implementations where the program is intended to be run.
It may also lead to the false conclusion that the declared types are
sufficient for the accuracy required.

You should choose the numeric type declarations to satisfy the lowest
precision (smallest number of digits) that will provide the required
accuracy. Careful analysis will be necessary to show that the
declarations are adequate. When you move to a machine with less
precision, you probably can use the same type declaration.

### Accuracy Constraints

#### guideline

  - Do not press the accuracy limits of the machine(s).

#### rationale

Just because two different machines use the same number of digits in the
mantissa of a floating-point number does not imply they will have the
same arithmetic properties. Some Ada implementations may give slightly
better accuracy than required by Ada because they make efficient use of
the machine. Do not write programs that depend on this.

### Comments

#### guideline

  - Comment the analysis and derivation of the numerical aspects of a
    program.

#### rationale

Decisions and background about why certain precisions are required in a
program are important to program revision or porting. The underlying
numerical analysis leading to the program should be commented.

### Subexpression Evaluation

#### guideline

  - Anticipate the range of values of subexpressions to avoid exceeding
    the underlying range of their base type. Use derived types,
    subtypes, factoring, and range constraints on numeric types (see
    Guidelines 3.4.1, 5.3.1, and 5.5.3).

#### example

This example is adapted from the Rationale (1995, ยง3.3):

``` ada
with Ada.Text_IO;
with Ada.Integer_Text_IO;
procedure Demo_Overflow is
-- assume the predefined type Integer has a 16-bit range
   X : Integer := 24_000;
   Y : Integer;
begin  -- Demo_Overflow
   y := (3 * X) / 4;  -- raises Constraint_Error if the machine registers used are 16-bit
  -- mathematically correct intermediate result if 32-bit registers
   Ada.Text_IO.Put ("(");
   Ada.Integer_Text_IO.Put (X);
   Ada.Text_IO.Put (" * 3 ) / 4 = ");
   Ada.Integer_Text_IO.Put (Y);
exception
   when Constraint_Error =>
      Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line ("3 * X too big for register!");
end Demo_Overflow;
```

#### rationale

The Ada language does not require that an implementation perform range
checks on subexpressions within an expression. Ada does require that
overflow checks be performed. Thus, depending on the order of evaluation
and the size of the registers, a subexpression will either overflow or
produce the mathematically correct result. In the event of an overflow,
you will get the exception Constraint\_Error. Even if the implementation
on your program's current target does not result in an overflow on a
subexpression evaluation, your program might be ported to an
implementation that does.

### Relational Tests

#### guideline

  - Consider using \<= and \>= to do relational tests on real valued
    arguments, avoiding the \<, \>, =, and /= operations.
  - Use values of type attributes in comparisons and checking for small
    values.

#### example

The following examples test for (1) absolute "equality" in storage, (2)
absolute "equality" in computation, (3) relative "equality" in storage,
and (4) relative "equality" in computation:

``` ada
abs (X - Y) <= Float_Type'Model_Small                -- (1)
abs (X - Y) <= Float_Type'Base'Model_Small           -- (2)
abs (X - Y) <= abs X * Float_Type'Model_Epsilon      -- (3)
abs (X - Y) <= abs X * Float_Type'Base'Model_Epsilon -- (4)
```

And, specifically, for "equality" to 0:

``` ada
abs X <= Float_Type'Model_Small                      -- (1)
abs X <= Float_Type'Base'Model_Small                 -- (2)
abs X <= abs X * Float_Type'Model_Epsilon            -- (3)
abs X <= abs X * Float_Type'Base'Model_Epsilon       -- (4)
```

#### rationale

Strict relational comparisons ( \<, \>, =, /= ) are a general problem
with computations involving real numbers. Because of the way comparisons
are defined in terms of model intervals, it is possible for the values
of the comparisons to depend on the implementation. Within a model
interval, the result of comparing two values is nondeterministic if the
values are not model numbers. In general, you should test for proximity
rather than equality as shown in the examples. See also Rationale (1995,
ยงยงG.4.1 and G.4.2.).

Type attributes are the primary means of symbolically accessing the
implementation of the Ada numeric model. When the characteristics of the
model numbers are accessed by type attributes, the source code is
portable. The appropriate model numbers of any implementation will then
be used by the generated code.

Although 0 is technically not a special case, it is often overlooked
because it looks like the simplest and, therefore, safest case. But in
reality, each time comparisons involve small values, you should evaluate
the situation to determine which technique is appropriate.

#### notes

Regardless of language, real-valued computations have inaccuracy. That
the corresponding mathematical operations have algebraic properties
usually introduces some confusion. This guideline explains how Ada deals
with the problem that most languages face.

### Decimal Types and the Information Systems Annex

#### guideline

  - In information systems, declare different numeric decimal types to
    correspond to different scales (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
  - Create objects of different decimal types to reflect different units
    of measure (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
  - Declare subtypes of the appropriately scaled decimal type to provide
    appropriate range constraints for application-specific types.
  - Encapsulate each measure category in a package (Brosgol, Eachus, and
    Emery 1994).
  - Declare as few decimal types as possible for unitless data (Brosgol,
    Eachus, and Emery 1994).
  - For decimal calculations, determine whether the result should be
    truncated toward 0 or rounded.
  - Avoid decimal types and arithmetic on compilers that do not support
    the Information Systems Annex (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex F)
    in full.

#### example

``` ada
-- The salary cap today is $500,000; however this can be expanded to $99,999,999.99.
type Executive_Salary is delta 0.01 digits 10 range 0 .. 500_000.00;

------------------------------------------------------------------------------
package Currency is

   type Dollars is delta 0.01 digits 12;

   type Marks   is delta 0.01 digits 12;

   type Yen     is delta 0.01 digits 12;

   function To_Dollars (M : Marks) return Dollars;
   function To_Dollars (Y : Yen)   return Dollars;

   function To_Marks (D : Dollars) return Marks;
   function To_Marks (Y : Yen)     return Marks;

   function To_Yen (D : Dollars) return Yen;
   function To_Yen (M : Marks)   return Yen;

end Currency;
```

#### rationale

The Ada language does not provide any predefined decimal types.
Therefore, you need to declare decimal types for the different scales
you will need to use. Differences in scale and precision must be
considered in deciding whether or not a common type will suffice
(Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).

You need different types for objects measured in different units. This
allows the compiler to detect mismatched values in expressions. If you
declare all decimal objects to be of a single type, you forego the
benefits of strong typing. For example, in an application that involves
several currencies, each currency should be declared as a separate type.
You should provide appropriate conversions between different currencies.

You should map data with no particular unit of measure to a small set of
types or a single type to avoid the explosion of conversions between
numeric types.

Separate the range requirement on a decimal type from its precision,
i.e., the number of significant digits required. From the point of view
of planning for change and ease of maintenance, you can use the digit's
value to accommodate future growth in the values to be stored in objects
of the type. For example, you may want to anticipate growth for database
values and report formats. You can constrain the values of the type
through a range constraint that matches current needs. It is easier to
modify the range and avoid redefining databases and reports.

Ada automatically truncates toward 0. If your requirements are to round
the decimal result, you must explicitly do so using the 'Round
attribute.

The core language defines the basic syntax of and operations on decimal
types. It does not specify, however, the minimum number of significant
digits that must be supported. Nor does the core language require the
compiler to support values of Small other than powers of 2, thus
enabling the compiler effectively to reject a decimal declaration (Ada
Reference Manual 1995, ยง3.5.9). The Information Systems Annex provides
additional support for decimal types. It requires a minimum of 18
significant digits. It also specifies a Text\_IO.Editing package that
provides support analogous to the COBOL picture approach.

### Storage Control

The management of dynamic storage can vary between Ada environments. In
fact, some environments do not provide any deallocation. The following
Ada storage control mechanisms are implementation-dependent and should
be used with care in writing portable programs.

### Representation Clause

#### guideline

  - Do not use a representation clause to specify number of storage
    units.

#### rationale

The meaning of the 'Storage\_Size attribute is ambiguous; specifying a
particular value will not improve portability. It may or may not include
space allocated for parameters, data, etc. Save the use of this feature
for designs that must depend on a particular vendor's implementation.

#### notes

During a porting activity, it can be assumed that any occurrence of
storage specification indicates an implementation dependency that must
be redesigned.

### Access-to-Subprogram Values

#### guideline

  - Do not compare access-to-subprogram values.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยง3.10.2) explains that an
"implementation may consider two access-to-subprogram values to be
unequal, even though they designate the same subprogram. This might be
because one points directly to the subprogram, while the other points to
a special prologue that performs an Elaboration\_Check and then jumps to
the subprogram." The Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยง4.5.2) states that it
is "unspecified whether two access values that designate the same
subprogram but are the result of distinct evaluations of Access
attribute references are equal or unequal."

See also Guideline 5.3.4.

#### exceptions

If you must compare an access-to-subprogram value, you should define a
constant using the access-to-subprogram value and make all future
comparisons against the constant. However, if you attempt to compare
access-to-subprogram values with different levels of indirection, the
values might still be unequal, even if designating the same subprogram.

### Storage Pool Mechanisms

#### guideline

  - Consider using explicitly defined storage pool mechanisms.

#### example

See the Ada Reference Manual 1995, ยง13.11.2).

You use allocators as before. Instead of using unchecked deallocation,
you maintain your own free lists of objects that are no longer in use
and available for reuse.

You use allocators and possibly unchecked deallocation; however, you
implement a storage pool and associate it with the access type(s) via a
Storage\_Pool clause. You can use this technique to implement a
mark/release storage management paradigm, which might be significantly
faster than an allocate/deallocate paradigm. Some vendors may provide a
mark/release package as part of their Ada environment.

You do not use allocators, but instead use unchecked conversion from the
address and do all your own default initialization, etc. It is unlikely
you would use this last option because you lose automatic default
initialization.

## Tasking

The definition of tasking in the Ada language leaves many
characteristics of the tasking model up to the implementor. This allows
a vendor to make appropriate tradeoffs for the intended application
domain, but it also diminishes the portability of designs and code
employing the tasking features. In some respects, this diminished
portability is an inherent characteristic of concurrency approaches (see
Nissen and Wallis 1984, 37). A discussion of Ada tasking dependencies
when employed in a distributed target environment is beyond the scope of
this book. For example, multiprocessor task scheduling, interprocessor
rendezvous, and the distributed sense of time through package Calendar
are all subject to differences between implementations. For more
information, Nissen and Wallis (1984) and ARTEWG (1986) touch on these
issues, and Volz et al. (1985) is one of many research articles
available.

If the Real-Time Systems Annex is supported, then many concurrency
aspects are fully defined and, therefore, a program can rely on these
features while still being portable to other implementations that
conform to the Real-Time Systems Annex. The following sections provide
guidelines based on the absence of this annex.

### Task Activation Order

#### guideline

  - Do not depend on the order in which task objects are activated when
    declared in the same declarative list.

#### rationale

The order in which task objects are activated is left undefined in the
Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยง9.2). See also Guideline 6.1.5.

### Delay Statements

#### guideline

  - Do not depend on a particular delay being achievable (Nissen and
    Wallis 1984).
  - Never use knowledge of the execution pattern of tasks to achieve
    timing requirements.

#### rationale

The rationale for this appears in Guideline 6.1.7. In addition, the
treatment of delay statements varies from implementation to
implementation, thereby hindering portability.

Using knowledge of the execution pattern of tasks to achieve timing
requirements is nonportable. Ada does not specify the underlying
scheduling algorithm, and there is no guarantee that system clock ticks
will be consistently precise between different systems. Thus, when you
change system clocks, your delay behavior also changes.

### Package Calendar, Type Duration, and System.Tick

#### guideline

  - Do not assume a correlation between System.Tick and type Duration
    (see Guidelines 6.1.7 and 7.4.2).

#### rationale

Such a correlation is not required, although it may exist in some
implementations.

### Select Statement Evaluation Order

#### guideline

  - Do not depend on the order in which guard conditions are evaluated
    or on the algorithm for choosing among several open select
    alternatives.

#### rationale

The language does not define the order of these conditions, so assume
that they are arbitrary.

### Task Scheduling Algorithm

#### guideline

  - Do not assume that tasks execute uninterrupted until they reach a
    synchronization point.
  - Use pragma Priority to distinguish general levels of importance only
    (see Guideline 6.1.6).

#### rationale

The Ada tasking model requires that tasks be synchronized only through
the explicit means provided in the language (i.e., rendezvous, task
dependence, pragma Atomic). The scheduling algorithm is not defined by
the language and may vary from time sliced to preemptive priority. Some
implementations provide several choices that a user may select for the
application.

#### notes

The number of priorities may vary between implementations. In addition,
the manner in which tasks of the same priority are handled may vary
between implementations even if the implementations use the same general
scheduling algorithm.

#### exceptions

In real-time systems, it is often necessary to tightly control the
tasking algorithm to obtain the required performance. For example,
avionics systems are frequently driven by cyclic events with limited
asynchronous interruptions. A nonpreemptive tasking model is
traditionally used to obtain the greatest performance in these
applications. Cyclic executives can be programmed in Ada, as can a
progression of scheduling schemes from cyclic through
multiple-frame-rate to full asynchrony (MacLaren 1980), although an
external clock is usually required.

### Abort

#### guideline

  - Avoid using the abort statement.

#### rationale

The rationale for this appears in Guideline 6.3.3. In addition,
treatment of the abort statement varies from implementation to
implementation, thereby hindering portability.

### Unprotected Shared Variables and Pragmas Atomic and Volatile

#### guideline

  - Do not use unprotected shared variables.
  - Consider using protected types to provide data synchronization.
  - Have tasks communicate through the rendezvous mechanism.
  - Do not use unprotected shared variables as a task synchronization
    device.
  - Consider using protected objects to encapsulate shared data.
  - Use pragma Atomic or Volatile only when you are forced to by
    run-time system deficiencies.

#### example

See Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.1.2.

#### rationale

The rationale for this appears in Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.2.4. In
addition, the treatment of unprotected shared variables varies from
implementation to implementation, thereby hindering portability.

## Exceptions

You should exercise care when using predefined exceptions because
aspects of their treatment may vary between implementations.
Implementation-specific exceptions must, of course, be avoided. See
Guidelines 4.3 an 5.8 for further information on exceptions. See
Guideline 7.1.6 for further information on vendor-supplied features.

### Predefined and User-Defined Exceptions

#### guideline

  - Do not depend on the exact locations at which predefined exceptions
    are raised.
  - Do not rely on the behavior of Ada.Exceptions beyond the minimum
    defined in the language.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยง11) states that, among implementations,
a predefined exception for the same cause may be raised from different
locations. You will not be able to discriminate between the exceptions.
Further, each of the predefined exceptions is associated with a variety
of conditions. Any exception handler written for a predefined exception
must be prepared to deal with any of these conditions.

Guideline 5.6.9 discusses the use of blocks to define local exception
handlers that can catch exceptions close to their point of origin.

### Implementation-Specific Exceptions

#### guideline

  - Do not raise implementation-specific exceptions.
  - Convert implementation-specific exceptions within interface packages
    to visible user-defined exceptions.

#### rationale

No exception defined specifically by an implementation can be guaranteed
to be portable to other implementations whether or not they are from the
same vendor. Not only may the names be different, but the range of
conditions triggering the exceptions may be different also.

If you create interface packages for the implementation-specific
portions of your program, those packages can catch or recognize
implementation-specific exceptions and convert them into user-defined
exceptions that have been declared in the specification. Do not allow
yourself to be forced to find and change the name of every handler you
have written for these exceptions when the program is ported.

## Representation Clauses And Implementation-Dependent Features

Ada provides many implementation-dependent features that permit greater
control over and interaction with the underlying hardware architecture
than is normally provided by a high-order language. These mechanisms are
intended to assist in systems programming and real-time programming to
obtain greater efficiency (e.g., specific size and layout of variables
through representation clauses) and direct hardware interaction (e.g.,
interrupt entries) without having to resort to assembly level
programming. Given the objectives for these features, it is not
surprising that you must usually pay a significant price in portability
to use them. In general, where portability is the main objective, do not
use these features. When you must use these features, encapsulate them
in packages that are well-commented as interfacing to the particular
target environment. This section identifies the various features and
their recommended use with respect to portability.

### Representation Clauses

#### guideline

  - Use algorithms that do not depend on the representation of the data
    and, therefore, do not need representation clauses.
  - Consider using representation clauses when accessing or defining
    interface data or when a specific representation is needed to
    implement a design.
  - Do not assume that sharing source files between programs guarantees
    the same representation of data types in those files.

#### rationale

In many cases, it is easy to use representation clauses to implement an
algorithm, even when it is not necessary. There is also a tendency to
document the original programmer's assumptions about the representation
for future reference. But there is no guarantee that another
implementation will support the representation chosen. Unnecessary
representation clauses also confuse porting or maintenance efforts,
which must assume that the programmer depends on the documented
representation.

Interfaces to external systems and devices are the most common
situations where a representation clause is needed. Uses of pragma
Import and address clauses should be evaluated during design and porting
to determine whether a representation clause is needed.

Without representation clauses, the language does not require two
compilations of an unchanged file to result in the same data
representation. Things that can change the representation between
compilations include:

  - A change in a file earlier in the compilation order
  - A change in the optimization strategy or level
  - A change in versions of the compiler
  - A change in actual compilers
  - A change in the availability of system resources

Therefore, two independently linked programs or partitions should only
share data that has their representations explicitly controlled.

#### notes

During a porting effort, all representation clauses can be evaluated as
either design artifacts or specifications for accessing interface data
that might change with a new implementation.

### Package System

#### guideline

  - Avoid using package System constants except in attempting to
    generalize other machine-dependent constructs.

#### rationale

Because the values in this package are implementation-provided,
unexpected effects can result from their use.

#### notes

If you must guarantee that physical record layouts will remain the same
between implementations, you can express record fields by their first
and last bit positions as shown in the Ada Reference Manual (1995,
ยง13.5.1). Static expressions and named numbers should be used to let
the compiler compute the endpoints of each range in terms of earlier
fields. In this case, greater portability can be achieved by using
System.Storage\_Unit to let the compiler compute the value of the named
number. However, this method might not work for all values of
System.Storage\_Unit.

#### exceptions

Do use package System constants to parameterize other
implementation-dependent features (see Pappas (1985, ยง13.7.1).

### Machine Code Inserts

#### guideline

  - Avoid machine code inserts.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, Annex C) suggests that the package that
implements machine code inserts is optional. Additionally, it is not
standardized so that machine code inserts are most likely not portable.
In fact, it is possible that two different vendors' syntax will differ
for an identical target, and differences in lower-level details, such as
register conventions, will hinder portability.

#### exceptions

If machine code inserts must be used to meet another project
requirement, recognize and document the portability decreasing effects.

In the declarative region of the body of the routine where machine code
inserts are being used, insert comments explaining what functions
inserts provide and (especially) why the inserts are necessary. Comment
the necessity of using machine code inserts by delineating what went
wrong with attempts to use other higher level constructs.

### Interfacing to Foreign Languages

#### guideline

  - Use the package Interfaces and its language-defined child packages
    rather than implementation-specific mechanisms.
  - Consider using pragma Import rather than access-to-subprogram types
    for interfacing to subprograms in other languages. (Preferably using
    the "External\_Name =\>" argument.)
  - Isolate all subprograms employing pragmas Import, Export, and
    Convention to implementation-specific (interface) package bodies.

#### example

This example shows how to interface with the following cube root
function written in C:

``` c
double cbrt (double x);
```

``` ada
package Math_Utilities is

   Argument_Error : exception;

   function Cube_Root (X : Float) return Float;

   ...

end Math_Utilities;
   
------------------------------------------------------------------------------
with Interfaces.C;
package body Math_Utilities is

   function Cube_Root (X : Float) return Float is

      function C_Cbrt (X : Interfaces.C.Double) return Interfaces.C.Double;
      pragma Import (Convention    => C,
                     Entity        => C_Cbrt,
                     External_Name => "cbrt");

   begin
      if X < 0.0 then
         raise Argument_Error;
      else
         return Float (C_Cbrt (Interfaces.C.Double (X)));
      end if;
   end Cube_Root;

   ...

end Math_Utilities;
```

#### rationale

For static interfacing to subprograms in other languages, the pragma
Import provides a better solution than access to subprograms because no
indirection is required. The pragma Interface (Ada Reference Manual
1983) has been replaced by pragmas Import, Export, and Convention. Annex
B of the Rationale (1995) discusses how to use these pragmas in
conjunction with the access-to-subprogram types in interfacing to other
languages.

Note especially the distinction between the "External\_Name =\>" and
"Link\_Name =\>" parameters to pragma Import which are frequently
confused. External\_Name specifies the procedure name as it appears in
the source code of the other language (such as C or Fortran). Link\_Name
specifies the name used by the linker. Typically, only one of these
parameters is specified, and generally External\_Name is the preferred
choice for portability.

Access to subprogram types is useful for implementing callbacks in a
separate subsystem, such as the X Window system.

The problems with interfacing to foreign languages are complex. These
problems include pragma syntax differences, conventions for
linking/binding Ada to other languages, and mapping Ada variables to
foreign language variables. By hiding these dependencies within
interface packages, the amount of code modification can be reduced.

#### exceptions

It is often necessary to interact with other languages, if only an
assembly language, to reach certain hardware features. In these cases,
clearly comment the requirements and limitations of the interface and
pragma Import, Export, and Conventions usage.

### Implementation-Specific Pragmas and Attributes

#### guideline

  - Avoid pragmas and attributes added by the compiler implementor.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995) permits an implementor to add pragmas
and attributes to exploit a particular hardware architecture or software
environment. These are obviously even more implementation-specific and
therefore less portable than an implementor's interpretations of the
predefined pragmas and attributes. However, the Ada Reference Manual
(1995) defines a set of annexes that have a uniform and consistent
approach to certain specialized needs, namely, real-time systems,
distributed systems, information systems, numerics, interfacing to
foreign languages, and safety and security. You should always prefer the
facilities defined in the annexes to any vendor-defined pragmas and
attributes.

### Unchecked Deallocation

#### guideline

  - Avoid dependence on Ada.Unchecked\_Deallocation (see Guideline
    5.9.2).

#### rationale

The unchecked storage deallocation mechanism is one method for
overriding the default time at which allocated storage is reclaimed. The
earliest default time is when an object is no longer accessible, for
example, when control leaves the scope where an access type was declared
(the exact point after this time is implementation-dependent). Any
unchecked deallocation of storage performed prior to this may result in
an erroneous Ada program if an attempt is made to access the object.

This guideline is stronger than Guideline 5.9.2 because of the extreme
dependence on the implementation of Ada.Unchecked\_Deallocation. Using
it could cause considerable difficulty with portability.

#### notes

Ada.Unchecked\_Deallocation is a supported feature in all Ada
implementations. The portability issue arises in that unchecked storage
deallocations might cause varying results in different implementations.

#### exceptions

Using unchecked deallocation of storage can be beneficial in local
control of highly iterative or recursive algorithms where available
storage may be exceeded.

### Unchecked Access

#### guideline

  - Avoid dependence on the attribute Unchecked\_Access (see Guideline
    5.9.2).

#### rationale

Access values are subject to accessibility restrictions. Using the
attribute Unchecked\_Access prevents these rules from being checked, and
the programmer runs the risk of having dangling references.

### Unchecked Conversion

#### guideline

  - Avoid dependence on Ada.Unchecked\_Conversion (see Guideline 5.9.1).

#### rationale

The unchecked type conversion mechanism is, in effect, a means of
bypassing the strong typing facilities in Ada. An implementation is free
to limit the types that may be matched and the results that occur when
object sizes differ.

#### exceptions

Unchecked type conversion is useful in implementation-dependent parts of
Ada programs where lack of portability is isolated and where low-level
programming and foreign language interfacing are the objectives.

If an enumeration representation clause is used, unchecked type
conversion is the only language-provided way to retrieve the internal
integer code of an enumeration value.

### Run-Time Dependencies

#### guideline

  - Avoid the direct invocation of or implicit dependence upon an
    underlying host operating system or Ada run-time support system,
    except where the interface is explicitly defined in the language
    (e.g., Annex C or D of the Ada Reference Manual \[1995\]).
  - Use standard bindings and the package Ada.Command\_Line when you
    need to invoke the underlying run-time support system.
  - Use features defined in the Annexes rather than vendor-defined
    features.

#### rationale

Features of an implementation not specified in the Ada Reference Manual
(1995) will usually differ between implementations. Specific
implementation-dependent features are not likely to be provided in other
implementations. In addition to the mandatory predefined language
environment, the annexes define various packages, attributes, and
pragmas to standardize implementation-dependent features for several
specialized domains. You enhance portability when you use the features
declared in the packages in the Annexes because you can port your
program to other vendor environments that implement the same Annexes you
have used. Even if a majority of vendors eventually provide similar
features, they are unlikely to have identical formulations. Indeed,
different vendors may use the same formulation for (semantically)
entirely different features.

When coding, try to avoid depending on the underlying operating system.
Consider the consequences of including system calls in a program on a
host development system. If these calls are not flagged for removal and
replacement, the program could go through development and testing only
to be unusable when moved to a target environment that lacks the
facilities provided by those system calls on the host.

Guideline 7.1.5 discusses the use of the package Ada.Command\_Line. If
an Ada environment implements a standard binding to operating system
services, such as POSIX/Ada, and you write POSIX-compliant calls, your
program should be portable across more systems.

#### exceptions

In real-time, embedded systems, making calls to low-level support system
facilities may often be unavoidable. Isolating the uses of these
facilities may be too difficult. Comment them as you would machine code
inserts (see Guideline 7.6.3); they are, in a sense, instructions for
the virtual machine provided by the support system. When isolating the
uses of these features, provide an interface for the rest of your
program to use, which can be ported through replacement of the
interface's implementation.

## Input/Output

I/O facilities in Ada are not a part of the syntactic definition of the
language. The constructs in the language have been used to define a set
of packages for this purpose. These packages are not expected to meet
all the I/O needs of all applications, in particular, embedded systems.
They serve as a core subset that may be used on straightforward data and
that can be used as examples of building I/O facilities upon the
low-level constructs provided by the language. Providing an I/O
definition that could meet the requirements of all applications and
integrate with the many existing operating systems would result in
unacceptable implementation dependencies. The types of portability
problems encountered with I/O tend to be different for applications
running with a host operating system versus embedded targets where the
Ada run-time is self-sufficient. Interacting with a host operating
system offers the added complexity of coexisting with the host file
system structures (e.g., hierarchical directories), access methods
(e.g., indexed sequential access method \[ISAM\]), and naming
conventions (e.g., logical names and aliases based on the current
directory). The section on Input/Output in ARTEWG (1986) provides some
examples of this kind of dependency. Embedded applications have
different dependencies that often tie them to the low-level details of
their hardware devices.

The major defense against these inherent implementation dependencies in
I/O is to try to isolate their functionality in any given application.
The majority of the following guidelines are focused in this direction.

### Name and Form Parameters

#### guideline

  - Use constants and variables as symbolic actuals for the Name and
    Form parameters on the predefined I/O packages. Declare and
    initialize them in an implementation dependency package.

#### rationale

The format and allowable values of these parameters on the predefined
I/O packages can vary greatly between implementations. Isolation of
these values facilitates portability. Not specifying a Form string or
using a null value does not guarantee portability because the
implementation is free to specify defaults.

#### notes

It may be desirable to further abstract the I/O facilities by defining
additional Create and Open procedures that hide the visibility of the
Form parameter entirely (see Pappas 1985, 54-55).

### File Closing

#### guideline

  - Close all files explicitly.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยงA.7) does not define what happens to
external files after completion of the main subprogram (in particular,
if corresponding files have not been closed).

The disposition of a closed temporary file may vary, perhaps affecting
performance and space availability (ARTEWG 1986).

### Input/Output on Access Types

#### guideline

  - Avoid performing I/O on access types.

#### rationale

The Ada Reference Manual (1995, ยงA.7) does not specify the effects of
I/O on access types. When such a value is written, it is placed out of
reach of the implementation. Thus, it is out of reach of the
reliability-enhancing controls of strong type checking.

Consider the meaning of this operation. One possible implementation of
the values of access types is virtual addresses. If you write such a
value, how can you expect another program to read that value and make
any sensible use of it? The value cannot be construed to refer to any
meaningful location within the reader's address space, nor can a reader
infer any information about the writer's address space from the value
read. The latter is the same problem that the writer would have trying
to interpret or use the value if it is read back in. To wit, a garbage
collection and/or heap compaction scheme may have moved the item
formerly accessed by that value, leaving that value "pointing" at space
that is now being put to indeterminable uses by the underlying
implementation.

### Package Ada.Streams.Stream\_IO

#### guideline

  - Consider using Sequential\_IO or Direct\_IO instead of Stream\_IO
    unless you need the low-level, heterogeneous I/O features provided
    by Stream\_IO.

#### rationale

Sequential\_IO and Direct\_IO are still well suited for processing
homogeneous files. Additionally, in cases where the intent is to process
homogeneous files, the use of Sequential\_IO or Direct\_IO has the
advantage of enforcing this intent at compile time.

Stream\_IO should be reserved for processing heterogeneous files. In
this case, a file is not a sequence of objects of all the same type but
rather a sequence of objects of varying types. To read a heterogeneous
sequence of objects in the correct order requires some
application-specific knowledge.

### Current Error Files

#### guideline

  - Consider using Current\_Error and Set\_Error for run-time error
    messages.

#### example

``` ada
with Ada.Text_IO;

...

begin
   Ada.Text_IO.Open (File => Configuration_File,
                     Mode => Ada.Text_IO.In_File,
                     Name => Configuration_File_Name);
exception
   when Ada.Text_IO.Name_Error =>
      Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (File => Ada.Text_IO.Standard_Error,
                            Item => "Can't open configuration file.");
      ...
end;
```

#### rationale

The package Text\_IO includes the concept of a current error file. You
should report errors to the user through the associated subprograms
Current\_Error and Set\_Error instead of the standard output facilities.
In interactive applications, using the Text\_IO error facilities
increases the portability of your user interface.

#### notes

In a program with multiple tasks for I/O, you need to be careful of two
or more tasks trying to set Current\_Input, Current\_Output, or
Current\_Error. The potential problem lies in unprotected updates to the
"shared" state associated with a package, in this case, the package
Text\_IO. Guidelines 6.1.1 and 6.2.4 discuss the related issues of
unprotected shared variables.

## Summary

### fundamentals

  - In programs or components intended to have a long life, avoid using
    the features of Ada declared as "obsolescent" by Annex J of the Ada
    Reference Manual (1995), unless the use of the feature is needed for
    backward compatibility with Ada 83 (Ada Reference Manual 1983).
  - Document the use of any obsolescent features.
  - Avoid using the following features:
      - The short renamings of the packages in the predefined
        environment (e.g., Text\_IO as opposed to Ada.Text\_IO)
      - The character replacements of \! for |, : for \#, and % for
        quotation marks
      - Reduced accuracy subtypes of floating-point types
      - The 'Constrained attribute as applied to private types
      - The predefined package ASCII
      - The exception Numeric\_Error
      - Various representation specifications, including at clauses, mod
        clauses, interrupt entries, and the Storage\_Size attribute
  - Make informed assumptions about the support provided for the
    following on potential target platforms:
      - Number of bits available for type Integer (range constraints)
      - Number of decimal digits of precision available for
        floating-point types
      - Number of bits available for fixed-point types (delta and range
        constraints)
      - Number of characters per line of source text
      - Number of bits for Root\_Integer expressions
      - Number of seconds for the range of Duration
      - Number of milliseconds for Duration'Small
      - Minimum and maximum scale for decimal types
  - Avoid assumptions about the values and the number of values included
    in the type Character.
  - Use highlighting comments for each package, subprogram, and task
    where any nonportable features are present.
  - For each nonportable feature employed, describe the expectations for
    that feature.
  - Consider using only a parameterless procedure as the main
    subprogram.
  - Consider using Ada.Command\_Line for accessing values from the
    environment, but recognize that this package's behavior and even its
    specification are nonportable.
  - Encapsulate and document all uses of package Ada.Command\_Line.
  - Create packages specifically designed to isolate hardware and
    implementation dependencies and designed so that their specification
    will not change when porting.
  - Clearly indicate the objectives if machine or solution efficiency is
    the reason for hardware or implementation-dependent code.
  - For the packages that hide implementation dependencies, maintain
    different package bodies for different target environments.
  - Isolate interrupt receiving tasks into implementation-dependent
    packages.
  - Refer to Annex M of the Ada Reference Manual (1995) for a list of
    implementation-dependent features.
  - Avoid the use of vendor-supplied packages.
  - Avoid the use of features added to the predefined packages that are
    not specified in the Ada language definition or Specialized Needs
    Annexes.
  - Use features defined in the Specialized Needs Annexes rather than
    vendor-defined features.
  - Document clearly the use of any features from the Specialized Needs
    Annexes (systems programming, real-time systems, distributed
    systems, information systems, numerics, and safety and security).
  - Do not write code whose correct execution depends on the particular
    parameter passing mechanism used by an implementation (Ada Reference
    Manual 1995, ยง6.2; Cohen 1986).
  - If a subprogram has more than one formal parameter of a given
    subtype, at least one of which is \[in\] out, make sure that the
    subprogram can properly handle the case when both formal parameters
    denote the same actual object.
  - Avoid depending on the order in which certain constructs in Ada are
    evaluated .

### numeric types and expressions

  - Avoid using the predefined numeric types in package Standard . Use
    range and digits declarations and let the implementation pick the
    appropriate representation.
  - For programs that require greater accuracy than that provided by the
    global assumptions, define a package that declares a private type
    and operations as needed; see Pappas (1985) for a full explanation
    and examples.
  - Consider using predefined numeric types (Integer, Natural, Positive)
    for:
      - Indexes into arrays where the index type is not significant,
        such as type String
      - "Pure" numbers, that is, numbers with no associated physical
        unit (e.g., exponents)
      - Values whose purpose is to control a repeat or iteration count
  - Use an implementation that supports the Numerics Annex (Ada
    Reference Manual 1995, Annex G) when performance and accuracy are
    overriding concerns .
  - Carefully analyze what accuracy and precision you really need.
  - Do not press the accuracy limits of the machine(s).
  - Comment the analysis and derivation of the numerical aspects of a
    program.
  - Anticipate the range of values of subexpressions to avoid exceeding
    the underlying range of their base type. Use derived types,
    subtypes, factoring, and range constraints on numeric types.
  - Consider using \<= and \>= to do relational tests on real valued
    arguments, avoiding the \<, \>, =, and /= operations.
  - Use values of type attributes in comparisons and checking for small
    values.
  - In information systems, declare different numeric decimal types to
    correspond to different scales (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
  - Create objects of different decimal types to reflect different units
    of measure (Brosgol, Eachus, and Emery 1994).
  - Declare subtypes of the appropriately scaled decimal type to provide
    appropriate range constraints for application-specific types.
  - Encapsulate each measure category in a package (Brosgol, Eachus, and
    Emery 1994).
  - Declare as few decimal types as possible for unitless data (Brosgol,
    Eachus, and Emery 1994).
  - For decimal calculations, determine whether the result should be
    truncated toward 0 or rounded.
  - Avoid decimal types and arithmetic on compilers that do not support
    the Information Systems Annex (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex F)
    in full.

### storage control

  - Do not use a representation clause to specify number of storage
    units.
  - Do not compare access-to-subprogram values.
  - Consider using explicitly defined storage pool mechanisms.

### tasking

  - Do not depend on the order in which task objects are activated when
    declared in the same declarative list.
  - Do not depend on a particular delay being achievable (Nissen and
    Wallis 1984).
  - Never use knowledge of the execution pattern of tasks to achieve
    timing requirements.
  - Do not assume a correlation between System.Tick and type Duration.
  - Do not depend on the order in which guard conditions are evaluated
    or on the algorithm for choosing among several open select
    alternatives.
  - Do not assume that tasks execute uninterrupted until they reach a
    synchronization point.
  - Use pragma Priority to distinguish general levels of importance
    only.
  - Avoid using the abort statement.
  - Do not use unprotected shared variables.
  - Consider using protected types to provide data synchronization.
  - Have tasks communicate through the rendezvous mechanism.
  - Do not use unprotected shared variables as a task synchronization
    device.
  - Consider using protected objects to encapsulate shared data.
  - Use pragma Atomic or Volatile only when you are forced to by
    run-time system deficiencies.

#### exceptions

  - Do not depend on the exact locations at which predefined exceptions
    are raised.
  - Do not rely on the behavior of Ada.Exceptions beyond the minimum
    defined in the language.
  - Do not raise implementation-specific exceptions.
  - Convert implementation-specific exceptions within interface packages
    to visible user-defined exceptions.

### representation clauses and implementation-dependent features

  - Use algorithms that do not depend on the representation of the data
    and, therefore, do not need representation clauses.
  - Consider using representation clauses when accessing or defining
    interface data or when a specific representation is needed to
    implement a design .
  - Do not assume that sharing source files between programs guarantees
    the same representation of data types in those files.
  - Avoid using package System constants except in attempting to
    generalize other machine-dependent constructs.
  - Avoid machine code inserts.
  - Use the package Interfaces and its language-defined child packages
    rather than implementation-specific mechanisms.
  - Consider using pragma Import rather than access-to-subprogram types
    for interfacing to subprograms in other languages.
  - Isolate all subprograms employing pragmas Import, Export, and
    Convention to implementation-specific (interface) package bodies.
  - Avoid pragmas and attributes added by the compiler implementor.
  - Avoid dependence on Ada.Unchecked\_Deallocation.
  - Avoid dependence on the attribute Unchecked\_Access.
  - Avoid dependence on Ada.Unchecked\_Conversion.
  - Avoid the direct invocation of or implicit dependence upon an
    underlying host operating system or Ada run-time support system,
    except where the interface is explicitly defined in the language
    (e.g., Annex C or D of the Ada Reference Manual \[1995\]).
  - Use standard bindings and the package Ada.Command\_Line when you
    need to invoke the underlying

run-time support system.

  - Use features defined in the Annexes rather than vendor-defined
    features.

### input/output

  - Use constants and variables as symbolic actuals for the Name and
    Form parameters on the predefined I/O packages. Declare and
    initialize them in an implementation dependency package.
  - Close all files explicitly.
  - Avoid performing I/O on access types.
  - Consider using Sequential\_IO or Direct\_IO instead of Stream\_IO
    unless you need the low-level, heterogeneous I/O features provided
    by Stream\_IO.
  - Consider using Current\_Error and Set\_Error for run-time error
    messages.
:::note

This page of the "Ada Quality and Style Guide" has been adapted from the
original work at https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide, which is
licensed under the
[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/);
additional terms may apply.  Page not endorsed by Wikibooks or the Ada
Style Guide Wikibook authors. This page is licensed under the same license
as the original work.

:::
