---
title: Program Structure
sidebar_position: 4
---

Proper structure improves program clarity. This is analogous to
readability on lower levels and facilitates the use of the readability
guidelines (Chapter 3). The various program structuring facilities
provided by Ada were designed to enhance overall clarity of design.
These guidelines show how to use these facilities for their intended
purposes.

The concept of child packages supports the concept of subsystem, where a
subsystem is represented in Ada as a hierarchy of library units. In
general, a large system should be structured as a series of subsystems.
Subsystems should be used to represent logically related library units,
which together implement a single, high-level abstraction or framework.

Abstraction and encapsulation are supported by the package concept and
by private types. Related data and subprograms can be grouped together
and seen by a higher level as a single entity. Information hiding is
enforced via strong typing and by the separation of package and
subprogram specifications from their bodies. Exceptions and tasks are
additional Ada language elements that impact program structure.

## High-Level Structure

Well-structured programs are easily understood, enhanced, and
maintained. Poorly structured programs are frequently restructured
during maintenance just to make the job easier. Many of the guidelines
listed below are often given as general program design guidelines.

### Separate Compilation Capabilities

#### guideline

  - Place the specification of each library unit package in a separate
    file from its body.
  - Avoid defining library unit subprograms that are not intended to be
    used as main programs. If such subprograms are defined, then create
    an explicit specification, in a separate file, for each library unit
    subprogram.
  - Minimize the use of subunits.
  - In preference to subunits, use child library units to structure a
    subsystem into manageable units.
  - Place each subunit in a separate file.
  - Use a consistent file naming convention.
  - In preference to nesting in a package body, use a private child and
    with it to the parent body.
  - Use private child unit specifications for data and subprograms that
    are required by (other) child units that extend a parent unit's
    abstraction or services.

#### example

The file names below illustrate one possible file organization and
associated consistent naming convention. The library unit name uses the
adb suffix for the body. The suffix ads indicates the specification, and
any files containing subunits use names constructed by separating the
body name from the subunit name with an underscore:

`text_io.ads                — the specification`  
`text_io.adb                — the body`  
`text_io_integer_io.adb     — a subunit`  
`text_io_fixed_io.adb       — a subunit`  
`text_io_float_io.adb       — a subunit`  
`text_io_enumeration_io.adb — a subunit`

Depending on what characters your file system allows you to use in file
names, you could show the distinction between parent and subunit name
more clearly in the file name. If your file system allows the "\#"
character, for example, you could separate the body name from the
subunit name with a \#:

`text_io.ads                — the specification`  
`text_io.adb                — the body`  
`text_io#integer_io.adb     — a subunit`  
`text_io#fixed_io.adb       — a subunit`  
`text_io#float_io.adb       — a subunit`  
`text_io#enumeration_io.adb — a subunit`

Some operating systems are case-sensitive, although Ada itself is not a
case-sensitive language. For example, you could choose a convention of
all lowercase file names.

#### rationale

The main reason for the emphasis on separate files in this guideline is
to minimize the amount of recompilation required after each change.
Typically, during software development, bodies of units are updated far
more often than specifications. If the body and specification reside in
the same file, then the specification will be compiled each time the
body is compiled, even though the specification has not changed. Because
the specification defines the interface between the unit and all of its
users, this recompilation of the specification typically makes
recompilation of all users necessary in order to verify compliance with
the specification. If the specifications and bodies of the users also
reside together, then any users of these units will also have to be
recompiled and so on. The ripple effect can force a huge number of
compilations that could have been avoided, severely slowing the
development and test phase of a project. This is why you should place
specifications of all library units (nonnested units) in separate files
from their bodies.

Library unit subprograms should be minimized. The only real use for
library unit subprograms is as the main subprogram. In almost all other
cases, it is better to embed the subprogram into a package. This
provides a place (the package body) to localize data needed by the
subprogram. Moreover, it cuts down on the number of separate modules in
the system.

In general, you should use a separate specification for any library
subprogram that is mentioned in a with clause. This makes the with'ing
unit dependent on the library subprogram specification, not its body.

You should minimize the use of subunits because they create maintenance
problems. Declarations appearing in the parent body are visible in the
subunit, increasing the amount of data global to the subunit and, thus,
increasing the potential ripple effect of changes. Subunits hinder reuse
because they provide an incentive to put otherwise reusable code in the
subunit directly rather than in a common routine called from multiple
subprograms.

With the availability of child library units in Ada 95, you can avoid
most uses of subunits. For example, instead of using a subunit for a
large nested body, you should try to encapsulate this code in a child
library unit and add the necessary context clauses. You can modify the
body of the child unit without having to recompile any of the other
units in a subsystem.

An additional benefit of using multiple, separate files is that it
allows different implementors to modify different parts of the system at
the same time with conventional editors, which do not allow multiple
concurrent updates to a single file.

Finally, keeping bodies and specifications separate makes it possible to
have multiple bodies for the same specification or multiple
specifications for the same body. Although Ada requires that there be
exactly one specification per body in a system at any given time, it can
still be useful to maintain multiple bodies or multiple specifications
for use in different builds of a system. For example, a single
specification may have multiple bodies, each of which implements the
same functionality with a different tradeoff of time versus space
efficiency, or, for machine-dependent code, there may be one body for
each target machine. Maintaining multiple package specifications can
also be useful during development and test. You may develop one
specification for delivery to your customer and another for unit
testing. The first one would export only those subprograms intended to
be called from outside of the package during normal operation of the
system. The second one would export all subprograms of the package so
that each of them could be independently tested.

A consistent file naming convention is recommended to make it easier to
manage the large number of files that may result from following this
guideline.

In implementing the abstraction defined in a package specification, you
often need to write supporting subprograms that manipulate the internal
representation of the data. These subprograms should not be exported on
the interface. You have a choice of whether to place them in the package
body of the parent program or in a child package named in a context
clause of the parent package body. When you place them in the parent
package body, you make them inaccessible to all clients of the parent,
including extensions of the parent declared in child packages. If these
subprograms are needed to implement extensions of the parent
abstraction, you would be forced to modify both the parent specification
and the body because you would have to declare the extensions within the
parent specification. This technique would then force recompilation of
the entire package (specification and body) as well as all its clients.

Alternatively, you can implement the supporting subprograms in a private
child package. Because the parent unit's specification is not modified,
neither it nor its clients need to be recompiled. The data and
subprograms that might have declared in the parent unit body must now be
declared in the private child unit's specification to make them visible
to both the parent unit body and to any child units that extend the
parent unit's services or abstractions. (See also Guidelines 4.1.6 and
4.2.) This use of private child units will generally minimize
recompilations within the unit family and among its clients.

In declaring the child package private, you achieve a similar effect to
declaring it in the parent package body to the extent that clients of
the parent cannot name the private child in a context clause. You gain
flexibility because now you can extend the parent abstraction using
child packages without having to recompile the parent specification or
its body, assuming that you do not otherwise modify the parent or its
body. This added flexibility will usually compensate for the increased
dependency between units, in this case, the additional context clause on
the parent body (and other child package bodies) that names the private
child package of supporting subprograms.

### Configuration Pragmas

#### guideline

  - When possible, express configuration pragmas through compiler
    options or other means that do not require modifications to the
    source code.
  - When configuration pragmas must be placed in source code, consider
    isolating them to one compilation unit per partition; if specified,
    the main subprogram for the partition is recommended.

#### rationale

Configuration pragmas are generally used to select a partition-wide or
system-wide option. Usually, they reflect either high-level software
architecture decisions (e.g., pragma Task\_Dispatching\_Policy) or the
use of the software in a particular application domain (e.g.,
safety-critical software). If a configuration pragma is embedded within
a software component and that component is reused in a different context
where the pragma is no longer appropriate, then it may cause problems in
the new application. Such problems can include the rejection by the
compilation system of otherwise legal source code or unexpected behavior
at run-time. These problems can be significant given the wide scope of a
configuration pragma. In addition, maintenance of the original system
may require that some of these system-wide decisions be changed. If the
configuration pragmas are scattered throughout the software, it may be
difficult to locate the lines that need to change.

As a result, it is recommended that all configuration pragmas be kept in
a single compilation unit if possible to make them easy to locate and
modify as needed. If this compilation unit is unlikely to be reused
(e.g., a main subprogram), then the likelihood of conflicts with future
reusers is reduced. Finally, if these system-wide decisions are
indicated without embedding them in the code at all, such as through a
compiler option, then the problems described above are even less likely
to occur.

#### exceptions

Certain pragmas (e.g., pragma Suppress) can be used in several forms,
including as a configuration pragma. This guideline does not apply to
such pragmas when they are not used as a configuration pragma.

### Subprograms

#### guideline

  - Use subprograms to enhance abstraction.
  - Restrict each subprogram to the performance of a single action.

#### example

Your program is required to draw a menu of user options as part of a
menu-driven user interface package. Because the contents of the menu can
vary depending on the user state, the proper way to do this is to write
a subprogram to draw the menu. This way, the output subprogram has one
purpose and the way to determine the menu content is described
elsewhere.

``` ada
...
----------------------------------------------------------------------
procedure Draw_Menu
      (Title   : in    String;
       Options : in    Menu) is
   ...
begin  -- Draw_Menu
   Ada.Text_IO.New_Page;
   Ada.Text_IO.New_Line;
   Ada.Text_IO.Set_Col (Right_Column);
   Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (Title);
   Ada.Text_IO.New_Line;
   for Choice in Alpha_Numeric loop
     if Options (Choice) /= Empty_Line then
         Valid_Option (Choice) := True;
         Ada.Text_IO.Set_Col (Left_Column);
         Ada.Text_IO.Put (Choice & " -- ");
         Ada.Text_IO.Put_Line (Options (Choice));
     end if;
     ...
   end loop;
end Draw_Menu;
----------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

Subprograms are an extremely effective and well-understood abstraction
technique. Subprograms increase program readability by hiding the
details of a particular activity. It is not necessary that a subprogram
be called more than once to justify its existence.

#### notes

Guideline 10.7.1 discusses dealing with the overhead of subroutine
calls.

### Functions

#### guideline

  - Use a function when the subprogram's primary purpose is to provide a
    single value.
  - Minimize the side effect of a function.
  - Consider using a parameterless function when the value does not need
    to be static.
  - Use a parameterless function (instead of a constant) if the value
    should be inherited by types derived from the type.
  - Use a parameterless function if the value itself is subject to
    change.

#### example

Although reading a character from a file will change what character is
read next, this is accepted as a minor side effect compared to the
primary purpose of the following function:

``` ada
function Next_Character return Character is separate;
```

However, the use of a function like this could lead to a subtle problem.
Any time the order of evaluation is undefined, the order of the values
returned by the function will effectively be undefined. In this example,
the order of the characters placed in Word and the order that the
following two characters are given to the Suffix parameters are unknown.
No implementation of the Next\_Character function can guarantee which
character will go where:

``` ada
   Word : constant String := String'(1 .. 5 => Next_Character);
begin  -- Start_Parsing
   Parse(Keyword => Word,
         Suffix1 => Next_Character,
         Suffix2 => Next_Character);
end Start_Parsing;
```

Of course, if the order is unimportant (as in a random number
generator), then the order of evaluation is unimportant.

The following example shows the use of a parameterless function instead
of a constant:

``` ada
type T is private;
function Nil return T;        -- This function is a derivable operation of type T
function Default return T;    -- Also derivable, and the value can be changed by
                              -- recompiling the body of the function
```

This same example could have been written using constants:

``` ada
type T is private;
Nil : constant T;
Default : constant T;
```

#### rationale

A side effect is a change to any variable that is not local to the
subprogram. This includes changes to variables by other subprograms and
entries during calls from the function if the changes persist after the
function returns. Side effects are discouraged because they are
difficult to understand and maintain. Additionally, the Ada language
does not define the order in which functions are evaluated when they
occur in expressions or as actual parameters to subprograms. Therefore,
a program that depends on the order in which side effects of functions
occur is erroneous. Avoid using side effects anywhere.

### Packages

#### guideline

  - Use packages for information hiding.
  - Use packages with tagged types and private types for abstract data
    types.
  - Use packages to model abstract entities appropriate to the problem
    domain.
  - Use packages to group together related type and object declarations
    (e.g., common declarations for two or more library units).
  - Encapsulate machine dependencies in packages. Place a software
    interface to a particular device in a package to facilitate a change
    to a different device.
  - Place low-level implementation decisions or interfaces in
    subprograms within packages.
  - Use packages and subprograms to encapsulate and hide program details
    that may change (Nissen and Wallis 1984).

#### example

Reading the names and other attributes of external files is highly
machine dependent. A package called Directory could contain type and
subprogram declarations to support a generalized view of an external
directory that contains external files. Its internals may, in turn,
depend on other packages more specific to the hardware or operating
system:

``` ada
package Directory is

   type Directory_Listing is limited private;

   procedure Read_Current_Directory (D : in out Directory_Listing);

   generic
      with procedure Process (Filename : in String);
   procedure Iterate (Over : in Directory_Listing);

   ...

private

   type Directory_Listing is ...

end Directory;

---------------------------------------------------------------

package body Directory is

   -- This procedure is machine dependent
   procedure Read_Current_Directory (D : in out Directory_Listing) is separate;

   procedure Iterate (Over : in Directory_Listing) is
      ...
   begin
      ...

      Process (Filename);

      ...
   end Iterate;

   ...

end Directory;
```

#### rationale

Packages are the principal structuring facility in Ada. They are
intended to be used as direct support for abstraction, information
hiding, and modularization. For example, they are useful for
encapsulating machine dependencies as an aid to portability. A single
specification can have multiple bodies isolating implementation-specific
information so other parts of the code do not need to change.

Encapsulating areas of potential change helps to minimize the effort
required to implement that change by preventing unnecessary dependencies
among unrelated parts of the system.

#### notes

The most prevalent objection to this guideline usually involves
performance penalties. See Guideline 10.7.1 for a discussion about
subprogram overhead.

### Child Library Units

#### guideline

  - If a new library unit represents a logical extension to the original
    abstraction, define it as a child library unit.
  - If a new library unit is independent (e.g., introduces a new
    abstraction that depends only in part on the existing one), then
    encapsulate the new abstraction in a separate library unit.
  - Use child packages to implement a subsystem.
  - Use public child units for those parts of a subsystem that should be
    visible to clients of the subsystem.
  - Use private child units for those parts of a subsystem that should
    not be visible to clients of the subsystem.
  - Use private child units for local declarations used only in
    implementing the package specification.
  - Use child packages to implement constructors, even when they return
    access values.

#### example

The following example of a windowing system is taken from Cohen et al.
(1993) and illustrates some of the uses of child units in designing
subsystems. The parent (root) package declares the types, subtypes, and
constants that its clients and subsystems need. Individual child
packages provide specific parts of the windowing abstraction, such as
atoms, fonts, graphic output, cursors, and keyboard information:

``` ada
package X_Windows is
   ...
private
   ...
end X_Windows;

package X_Windows.Atoms is
   type Atom is private;
   ...
private
   ...
end X_Windows.Atoms;

package X_Windows.Fonts is
   type Font is private;
   ...
private
   ...
end X_Windows.Fonts;

package X_Windows.Graphic_Output is
   type Graphic_Context is private;
   type Image is private;
   ...
private
   ...
end X_Windows.Graphic_Output;

package X_Windows.Cursors is
   ...
end X_Windows.Cursors;

package X_Windows.Keyboard is
   ...
end X_Windows.Keyboard;
```

#### rationale

The user can create more precise packages with less cluttered
interfaces, using child library packages to extend the interfaces as
needed. The parent contains only the relevant functionality. The parent
provides a general-purpose interface, while the child units provide more
complete programming interfaces, tailored to that aspect of an
abstraction that they are extending or defining.

Child packages build on the modular strength of Ada where "the distinct
specification and body decouple the user interface to a package (the
specification) from its implementation (the body)" (Rationale 1995,
§II.7). Child packages provide the added capability of being able to
extend a parent package without recompiling the parent or the parent's
clients.

Child packages allow you to write logically distinct packages that share
a private type. The visibility rules give the private part of the child
specification and the body of the child visibility into the private part
of the parent. Thus, you can avoid creating a monolithic package for the
sake of developing abstractions that share a private type and need to
know its representation. The private representation is not available to
clients of the package, so the abstraction in the package and its
children is maintained.

Using private child packages for local declarations enables you to have
available the support declarations you need when implementing both the
parent package and extensions to the parent package. You enhance the
maintainability of your program by using a common set of support
declarations (data representations, data manipulation subprograms). You
can modify the internal representation and the implementation of the
support subprograms without modifying or recompiling the rest of your
subsystem because these support subprograms are implemented in the body
of the private child package. See also Guidelines 4.1.1, 4.2.1, 8.4.1,
and 8.4.8.

See also Guideline 9.4.1 for a discussion of the use of child library
units in creating a tagged type hierarchy.

### Cohesion

#### guideline

  - Make each package serve a single purpose.
  - Use packages to group related data, types, and subprograms.
  - Avoid collections of unrelated objects and subprograms (NASA 1987;
    Nissen and Wallis 1984).
  - Consider restructuring a system to move two highly related units
    into the same package (or package hierarchy) or to move relatively
    independent units into separate packages.

#### example

As a bad example, a package named Project\_Definitions is obviously a
"catch all" for a particular project and is likely to be a jumbled mess.
It probably has this form to permit project members to incorporate a
single with clause into their software.

Better examples are packages called Display\_Format\_Definitions,
containing all the types and constants needed by some specific display
in a specific format, and Cartridge\_Tape\_Handler, containing all the
types, constants, and subprograms that provide an interface to a
special-purpose device.

#### rationale

The degree to which the entities in a package are related has a direct
impact on the ease of understanding packages and programs made up of
packages. There are different criteria for grouping, and some criteria
are less effective than others. Grouping the class of data or activity
(e.g., initialization modules) or grouping data or activities based on
their timing characteristics is less effective than grouping based on
function or need to communicate through data (Charette 1986).

The "correct" structuring of a system can make a tremendous difference
in the maintainability of a system. Although it may seem painful at the
time, it is important to restructure if the initial structuring is not
quite right.

See also Guideline 5.4.2 on heterogeneous data.

#### notes

Traditional subroutine libraries often group functionally unrelated
subroutines. Even such libraries should be broken into a collection of
packages, each containing a logically cohesive set of subprograms.

### Data Coupling

#### guideline

  - Avoid declaring variables in package specifications.

#### example

This is part of a compiler. Both the package handling error messages and
the package containing the code generator need to know the current line
number. Rather than storing this in a shared variable of type Natural,
the information is stored in a package that hides the details of how
such information is represented and makes it available with access
routines:

``` ada
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
package Compilation_Status is
   type Line_Number is range 1 .. 2_500_000;
   function Source_Line_Number return Line_Number;
end Compilation_Status;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
with Compilation_Status;
package Error_Message_Processing is
   -- Handle compile-time diagnostic.
end Error_Message_Processing;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
with Compilation_Status;

package Code_Generation is
   -- Operations for code generation.
end Code_Generation;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

Strongly coupled program units can be difficult to debug and very
difficult to maintain. By protecting shared data with access functions,
the coupling is lessened. This prevents dependence on the data
structure, and access to the data can be controlled.

#### notes

The most prevalent objection to this guideline usually involves
performance penalties. When a variable is moved to the package body,
subprograms to access the variable must be provided and the overhead
involved during each call to those subprograms is introduced. See
Guideline 10.7.1 for a discussion about subprogram overhead.

### Tasks

#### guideline

  - Use tasks to model abstract, asynchronous entities within the
    problem domain.
  - Use tasks to define concurrent algorithms for multiprocessor
    architectures.
  - Use tasks to perform concurrent, cyclic, or prioritized activities
    (NASA 1987).

#### rationale

The rationale for this guideline is given under Guideline 6.1.2. Chapter
6 discusses tasking in more detail.

### Protected Types

#### guideline

  - Use protected types to control or synchronize access to data or
    devices.
  - Use protected types to implement synchronization tasks, such as a
    passive resource monitor.

#### example

See example in Guideline 6.1.1.

#### rationale

The rationale for this guideline is given under Guideline 6.1.1. Chapter
6 discusses concurrency and protected types in more detail.

## Visibility

Ada's ability to enforce information hiding and separation of concerns
through its visibility controlling features is one of the most important
advantages of the language, particularly when "pieces of a large system
are being developed separately." Subverting these features, for example,
by excessive reliance on the use clause, is wasteful and dangerous. See
also Guidelines 5.7 and 9.4.1.

### Minimization of Interfaces

#### guideline

  - Put only what is needed for the use of a package into its
    specification.
  - Minimize the number of declarations in package specifications.
  - Do not include extra operations simply because they are easy to
    build.
  - Minimize the context (with) clauses in a package specification.
  - Reconsider subprograms that seem to require large numbers of
    parameters.
  - Do not manipulate global data within a subprogram or package merely
    to limit the number of parameters.
  - Avoid unnecessary visibility; hide the implementation details of a
    program unit from its users.
  - Use child library units to control the visibility of parts of a
    subsystem interface.
  - Use private child packages for those declarations that should not be
    used outside the subsystem.
  - Use child library units present different views of an entity to
    different clients.
  - Design (and redesign) interfaces after having worked out the logic
    of various expected clients of the interface.

#### example

``` ada
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
package Telephone_Book is
   type Listing is limited private;
   procedure Set_Name (New_Name : in     String;
                       Current  : in out Listing);
   procedure Insert (Name    : in     String;
                     Current : in out Listing);
   procedure Delete (Obsolete : in     String;
                     Current  : in out Listing);
private
   type Information;
   type Listing is access Information;
end Telephone_Book;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
package body Telephone_Book is
   -- Full details of record for a listing
   type Information is
      record
         ...
         Next : Listing;
      end record;
   First : Listing;
   procedure Set_Name (New_Name : in     String;
                       Current  : in out Listing) is separate;
   procedure Insert (Name    : in      String;
                     Current : in out  Listing) is separate;
   procedure Delete (Obsolete : in     String;
                     Current  : in out Listing) is separate;
end Telephone_Book;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

For each entity in the specification, give careful consideration to
whether it could be moved to a child package or to the parent package
body. The fewer the extraneous details, the more understandable the
program, package, or subprogram. It is important to maintainers to know
exactly what a package interface is so that they can understand the
effects of changes. Interfaces to a subprogram extend beyond the
parameters. Any modification of global data from within a package or
subprogram is an undocumented interface to the "outside" as well.

Minimize the context clauses on a specification by moving unnecessary
clauses to the body. This technique makes the reader's job easier,
localizes the recompilation required when library units change, and
helps prevent a ripple effect during modifications. See also Guideline
4.2.3.

Subprograms with large numbers of parameters often indicate poor design
decisions (e.g., the functional boundaries of the subprogram are
inappropriate or parameters are structured poorly). Conversely,
subprograms with no parameters are likely to be accessing global data.

Objects visible within package specifications can be modified by any
unit that has visibility to them. The object cannot be protected or
represented abstractly by its enclosing package. Objects that must
persist should be declared in package bodies. Objects whose value
depends on program units external to their enclosing package are
probably either in the wrong package or are better accessed by a
subprogram specified in the package specification.

Child library units can provide distinct views of the hierarchical
library. The engineer can provide a different view for the client than
for the implementor (Rationale 1995, §10.1). By creating private child
packages, the engineer can provide facilities that are only available
inside the subsystem rooted at the parent library unit. The declarations
inside a private child package specification are not exported outside
the subsystem. Thus, the engineer can declare utilities needed to
implement an abstraction in a private child package (e.g., debugging
utilities \[Cohen et al. 1993\]) and be certain that users of the
abstraction (i.e., the clients) cannot access these utilities.

Different clients may have different needs for essentially the same
resource. Instead of having multiple versions of the resources, consider
having child units that export different views for different purposes.

Designing an interface based strictly on predicting what clients "might"
need can produce a bloated and inappropriate interface. What then
happens is that clients try to "live" with the interface and work around
the inappropriate interfaces, repeating code that logically should be
part of the shared abstraction. See Guideline 8.3.1 for a discussion of
interfaces from the reusability perspective.

#### notes

In some cases, subroutine libraries look like large, monolithic
packages. In such cases, it may be beneficial to break these up into
smaller packages, grouping them according to category (e.g.,
trigonometric functions).

### Nested Packages

#### guideline

  - Use child packages rather than nested packages to present different
    views of the same abstraction.
  - Nest package specifications within another package specification
    only for grouping operations or hiding common implementation
    details.

#### example

Annex A of the Ada Reference Manual (1995) gives an example of package
specification nesting. The specification of the generic package
Generic\_Bounded\_Length is nested inside the specification of package
Ada.Strings.Bounded. The nested package is a generic, grouping closely
related operations.

#### rationale

Grouping package specifications into an encompassing package emphasizes
a relationship of commonality among those packages. It also allows them
to share common implementation details resulting from the relationship.
Nesting packages allows you to organize the name space of the package in
contrast to the semantic effect of nesting inside of subprograms or task
bodies.

An abstraction occasionally needs to present different views to
different classes of users. Building one view upon another as an
additional abstraction does not always suffice because the functionality
of the operations presented by the views may be only partially
disjointed. Nesting specifications groups the facilities of the various
views, yet associates them with the abstraction they present. Abusive
mixing of the views by another unit would be easy to detect due to the
multiple use clauses or an incongruous mix of qualified names.

See the rationale discussed in Guideline 4.2.1.

### Restricting Visibility

#### guideline

  - Consider using private child packages in lieu of nesting.
  - Restrict the visibility of program units as much as possible by
    nesting them inside package bodies (Nissen and Wallis 1984) if you
    cannot use a private child package.
  - Minimize nesting program units inside subprograms and tasks.
  - Minimize the scope within which with clauses apply.
  - Only with those units directly needed.

#### example

This program illustrates the use of child library units to restrict
visibility. The procedure Rational\_Numbers.Reduce is nested inside the
body of Rational\_Numbers to restrict its visibility to the
implementation of this abstraction. Rather than make the text
input/output facilities visible to the entire rational number hierarchy,
it is only available to the body of the child library
Rational\_Numbers.IO. This example is adapted from the Ada Reference
Manual (1995, §§7.1, 7.2, and 10.1.1):

``` ada
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
package Rational_Numbers is
   type Rational is private;
   function "=" (X, Y: Rational) return Boolean;
   function "/" (X, Y: Integer)  return Rational;  -- construct a rational number
   function "+" (X, Y: Rational) return Rational;
   function "-" (X, Y: Rational) return Rational;
   function "*" (X, Y: Rational) return Rational;
   function "/" (X, Y: Rational) return Rational;  -- rational division
private
   ...
end Rational_Numbers;
package body Rational_Numbers is
   procedure Reduce (R :in out Rational) is . . . end Reduce;
   . . .
end Rational_Numbers;
package Rational_Numbers.IO is
   procedure Put (R : in  Rational);
   procedure Get (R : out Rational);
end Rational_Numbers.IO;
with Ada.Text_IO;
with Ada.Integer_Text_IO;
package body Rational_Numbers.IO is   -- has visibility to parent private type declaration
   procedure Put (R : in  Rational) is
   begin
      Ada.Integer_Text_IO.Put (Item => R.Numerator, Width => 0);
      Ada.Text_IO.Put ("/");
      Ada.Integer_Text_IO.Put (Item => R.Denominator, Width => 0);
   end Put;
   procedure Get (R : out Rational) is . . . end Get;
end Rational_Numbers.IO;
```

#### rationale

Restricting visibility of a program unit ensures that the program unit
is not called from some part of the system other than that which was
intended. This is done by nesting it inside the only unit that uses it,
by hiding it inside a package body rather than declaring it in the
package specification, or by declaring it as a private child unit. This
avoids errors and eases the job of maintainers by guaranteeing that a
local change in that unit will not have an unforeseen global effect.

Restricting visibility of a library unit by using with clauses on
subunits rather than on the entire parent unit is useful in the same
way. In the example above, it is clear that the package Text\_IO is used
only by the Listing\_Facilities package of the compiler.

Nesting inside subprograms and tasks is discouraged because it leads to
unreusable components. These components are essentially unreusable
because they make undesirable up-level references into the defining
context. Unless you truly want to ensure that the program unit is not
called from some unintended part of the system, you should minimize this
form of nesting.

See also Guideline 4.2.1 for a discussion of the use of child units.

#### notes

One way to minimize the coverage of a with clause is to use it only with
subunits that really need it. Consider making those subunits separate
compilation units when the need for visibility to a library unit is
restricted to a subprogram or two.

### Hiding Tasks

#### guideline

  - Carefully consider encapsulation of tasks.

#### example

``` ada
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
package Disk_Head_Scheduler is
   type Words        is ...
   type Track_Number is ...
   procedure Transmit (Track : in     Track_Number;
                       Data  : in     Words);
   ...
end Disk_Head_Scheduler;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
package body Disk_Head_Scheduler is
   ...
   task Control is
      entry Sign_In (Track : in     Track_Number);
      ...
   end Control;
   ----------------------------------------------------------------------
   task Track_Manager is
      entry Transfer(Track_Number) (Data : in     Words);
   end Track_Manager;
   ----------------------------------------------------------------------
   ...
   procedure Transmit (Track : in     Track_Number;
                       Data  : in     Words) is
   begin
      Control.Sign_In(Track);
      Track_Manager.Transfer(Track)(Data);
   end Transmit;
   ----------------------------------------------------------------------
   ...
end Disk_Head_Scheduler;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

The decision whether to declare a task in the specification or body of
an enclosing package is not a simple one. There are good arguments for
both.

Hiding a task specification in a package body and exporting (via
subprograms ) only required entries reduces the amount of extraneous
information in the package specification. It allows your subprograms to
enforce any order of entry calls necessary to the proper operation of
the tasks. It also allows you to impose defensive task communication
practices (see Guideline 6.2.2) and proper use of conditional and timed
entry calls. Finally, it allows the grouping of entries into sets for
export to different classes of users (e.g., producers versus consumers)
or the concealment of entries that should not be made public at all
(e.g., initialization, completion, signals). Where performance is an
issue and there are no ordering rules to enforce, the entries can be
renamed as subprograms to avoid the overhead of an extra procedure call.

An argument, which can be viewed as an advantage or disadvantage, is
that hiding the task specification in a package body hides the fact of a
tasking implementation from the user. If the application is such that a
change to or from a tasking implementation or a reorganization of
services among tasks need not concern users of the package, then this is
an advantage. However, if the package user must know about the tasking
implementation to reason about global tasking behavior, then it is
better not to hide the task completely. Either move it to the package
specification or add comments stating that there is a tasking
implementation, describing when a call may block, etc. Otherwise, it is
the package implementor's responsibility to ensure that users of the
package do not have to concern themselves with behaviors such as
deadlock, starvation, and race conditions.

Finally, keep in mind that hiding tasks behind a procedural interface
prevents the usage of conditional and timed entry calls and entry
families, unless you add parameters and extra code to the procedures to
make it possible for callers to direct the procedures to use these
capabilities.

## Exceptions

This section addresses the issue of exceptions in the context of program
structures. It discusses how exceptions should be used as part of the
interface to a unit, including what exceptions to declare and raise and
under what conditions to raise them. Information on how to handle,
propagate, and avoid raising exceptions is found in Guideline 5.8.
Guidelines on how to deal with portability issues are in Guideline 7.5.

### Using Exceptions to Help Define an Abstraction

#### guideline

  - For unavoidable internal errors for which no user recovery is
    possible, declare a single user-visible exception. Inside the
    abstraction, provide a way to distinguish between the different
    internal errors.
  - Do not borrow an exception name from another context.
  - Export (declare visibly to the user) the names of all exceptions
    that can be raised.
  - In a package, document which exceptions can be raised by each
    subprogram and task entry.
  - Do not raise exceptions for internal errors that can be avoided or
    corrected within the unit.
  - Do not raise the same exception to report different kinds of errors
    that are distinguishable by the user of the unit.
  - Provide interrogative functions that allow the user of a unit to
    avoid causing exceptions to be raised.
  - When possible, avoid changing state information in a unit before
    raising an exception.
  - Catch and convert or handle all predefined and compiler-defined
    exceptions at the earliest opportunity.
  - Do not explicitly raise predefined or implementation-defined
    exceptions.
  - Never let an exception propagate beyond its scope.

#### example

This package specification defines two exceptions that enhance the
abstraction:

``` ada
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
generic
   type Element is private;
package Stack is

   function Stack_Empty return Boolean;
   function Stack_Full  return Boolean;

   procedure Pop  (From_Top :    out Element);
   procedure Push (Onto_Top : in     Element);

   -- Raised when Pop is used on empty stack.
   Underflow : exception;

   -- Raised when Push is used on full stack.
   Overflow  : exception;

end Stack;
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
...
----------------------------------------------------------------------
procedure Pop (From_Top :    out Element) is
begin
   ...

   if Stack_Empty then
      raise Underflow;

   else -- Stack contains at least one element
      Top_Index := Top_Index - 1;
      From_Top  := Data(Top_Index + 1);

   end if;
end Pop;
--------------------------------------------------------------------
...
```

#### rationale

Exceptions should be used as part of an abstraction to indicate error
conditions that the abstraction is unable to prevent or correct. Because
the abstraction is unable to correct such an error, it must report the
error to the user. In the case of a usage error (e.g., attempting to
invoke operations in the wrong sequence or attempting to exceed a
boundary condition), the user may be able to correct the error. In the
case of an error beyond the control of the user, the user may be able to
work around the error if there are multiple mechanisms available to
perform the desired operation. In other cases, the user may have to
abandon use of the unit, dropping into a degraded mode of limited
functionality. In any case, the user must be notified.

Exceptions are a good mechanism for reporting such errors because they
provide an alternate flow of control for dealing with errors. This
allows error-handling code to be kept separate from the code for normal
processing. When an exception is raised, the current operation is
aborted and control is transferred directly to the appropriate exception
handler.

Several of the guidelines above exist to maximize the ability of the
user to distinguish and correct different kinds of errors. Declaring new
exception names, rather than raising exceptions declared in other
packages, reduces the coupling between packages and also makes different
exceptions more distinguishable. Exporting the names of all exceptions
that a unit can raise, rather than declaring them internally to the
unit, makes it possible for users of the unit to refer to the names in
exception handlers. Otherwise, the user would be able to handle the
exception only with an others handler. Finally, use comments to document
exactly which of the exceptions declared in a package can be raised by
each subprogram or task entry making it possible for the user to know
which exception handlers are appropriate in each situation.

In situations where there are errors for which the abstraction user can
take no intelligent action (e.g., there is no workaround or degraded
mode), it is better to export a single internal error exception. Within
the package, you should consider distinguishing between the different
internal errors. For instance, you could record or handle different
kinds of internal error in different ways. When you propagate the error
to the user, however, you should use a special internal error exception,
indicating that no user recovery is possible. You should also provide
relevant information when you propagate the error, using the facilities
provided in Ada.Exceptions. Thus, for any abstraction, you effectively
provide N + 1 different exceptions: N different recoverable errors and
one irrecoverable error for which there is no mapping to the
abstraction. Both the application requirements and what the client
needs/wants in terms of error information help you identify the
appropriate exceptions for an abstraction.

Because they cause an immediate transfer of control, exceptions are
useful for reporting unrecoverable errors, which prevent an operation
from being completed, but not for reporting status or modes incidental
to the completion of an operation. They should not be used to report
internal errors that a unit was able to correct invisibly to the user.

To provide the user with maximum flexibility, it is a good idea to
provide interrogative functions that the user can call to determine
whether an exception would be raised if a subprogram or task entry were
invoked. The function Stack\_Empty in the above example is such a
function. It indicates whether Underflow would be raised if Pop were
called. Providing such functions makes it possible for the user to avoid
triggering exceptions.

To support error recovery by its user, a unit should try to avoid
changing state during an invocation that raises an exception. If a
requested operation cannot be completely and correctly performed, then
the unit should either detect this before changing any internal state
information or should revert to the state at the time of the request.
For example, after raising the exception Underflow, the stack package in
the above example should remain in exactly the same state it was in when
Pop was called. If it were to partially update its internal data
structures for managing the stack, then future Push and Pop operations
would not perform correctly. This is always desirable, but not always
possible.

User-defined exceptions should be used instead of predefined or
compiler-defined exceptions because they are more descriptive and more
specific to the abstraction. The predefined exceptions are very general
and can be triggered by many different situations. Compiler-defined
exceptions are nonportable and have meanings that are subject to change
even between successive releases of the same compiler. This introduces
too much uncertainty for the creation of useful handlers.

If you are writing an abstraction, remember that the user does not know
about the units you use in your implementation. That is an effect of
information hiding. If any exception is raised within your abstraction,
you must catch it and handle it. The user is not able to provide a
reasonable handler if the original exception is allowed to propagate out
of the body of your abstraction. You can still convert the exception
into a form intelligible to the user if your abstraction cannot
effectively recover on its own.

Converting an exception means raising a user-defined exception in the
handler for the original exception. This introduces a meaningful name
for export to the user of the unit. Once the error situation is couched
in terms of the application, it can be handled in those terms.

## Summary

### high-level structure

  - Place the specification of each library unit package in a separate
    file from its body.
  - Avoid defining library unit subprograms that are not intended to be
    used as main programs. If such subprograms are defined, then create
    an explicit specification, in a separate file, for each library unit
    subprogram.
  - Minimize the use of subunits.
  - In preference to subunits, use child library units to structure a
    subsystem into manageable units.
  - Place each subunit in a separate file.
  - Use a consistent file naming convention.
  - In preference to nesting in a package body, use a private child and
    with it to the parent body.
  - Use private child unit specifications for data and subprograms that
    are required by (other) child units that extend a parent unit's
    abstraction or services.
  - When possible, express configuration pragmas through compiler
    options or other means that do not require modifications to the
    source code. .
  - When configuration pragmas must be placed in source code, consider
    isolating them to one compilation unit per partition; if specified,
    the main subprogram for the partition is recommended.
  - Use subprograms to enhance abstraction.
  - Restrict each subprogram to the performance of a single action.
  - Use a function when the subprogram's primary purpose is to provide a
    single value.
  - Minimize the side effect of a function.
  - Consider using a parameterless function when the value does not need
    to be static.
  - Use a parameterless function (instead of a constant) if the value
    should be inherited by types derived from the type.
  - Use a parameterless function if the value itself is subject to
    change.
  - Use packages for information hiding.
  - Use packages with tagged types and private types for abstract data
    types.
  - Use packages to model abstract entities appropriate to the problem
    domain.
  - Use packages to group together related type and object declarations
    (e.g., common declarations for two or more library units).
  - Encapsulate machine dependencies in packages. Place a software
    interface to a particular device in a package to facilitate a change
    to a different device.
  - Place low-level implementation decisions or interfaces in
    subprograms within packages.
  - Use packages and subprograms to encapsulate and hide program details
    that may change (Nissen and Wallis 1984).
  - If a new library unit represents a logical extension to the original
    abstraction, define it as a child library unit.
  - If a new library unit is independent (e.g., introduces a new
    abstraction that depends only in part on the existing one), then
    encapsulate the new abstraction in a separate library unit.
  - Use child packages to implement a subsystem.
  - Use public child units for those parts of a subsystem that should be
    visible to clients of the subsystem.
  - Use private child units for those parts of a subsystem that should
    not be visible to clients of the subsystem.
  - Use private child units for local declarations used only in
    implementing the package specification.
  - Use child packages to implement constructors, even when they return
    access values.
  - Make each package serve a single purpose.
  - Use packages to group related data, types, and subprograms.
  - Avoid collections of unrelated objects and subprograms (NASA 1987;
    Nissen and Wallis 1984).
  - Consider restructuring a system to move two highly related units
    into the same package (or package hierarchy) or to move relatively
    independent units into separate packages.
  - Avoid declaring variables in package specifications.
  - Use tasks to model abstract, asynchronous entities within the
    problem domain.
  - Use tasks to define concurrent algorithms for multiprocessor
    architectures.
  - Use tasks to perform concurrent, cyclic, or prioritized activities
    (NASA 1987).
  - Use protected types to control or synchronize access to data or
    devices.
  - Use protected types to implement synchronization tasks, such as a
    passive resource monitor.

### visibility

  - Put only what is needed for the use of a package into its
    specification.
  - Minimize the number of declarations in package specifications.
  - Do not include extra operations simply because they are easy to
    build.
  - Minimize the context (with) clauses in a package specification.
  - Reconsider subprograms that seem to require large numbers of
    parameters.
  - Do not manipulate global data within a subprogram or package merely
    to limit the number of parameters.
  - Avoid unnecessary visibility; hide the implementation details of a
    program unit from its users.
  - Use child library units to control the visibility of parts of a
    subsystem interface.
  - Use private child packages for those declarations that should not be
    used outside the subsystem.
  - Use child library units to present different views of an entity to
    different clients.
  - Design (and redesign) interfaces after having worked out the logic
    of various expected clients of the interface.
  - Use child packages rather than nested packages to present different
    views of the same abstraction.
  - Nest package specifications within another package specification
    only for grouping operations or hiding common implementation
    details.
  - Consider using private child packages in lieu of nesting.
  - Restrict the visibility of program units as much as possible by
    nesting them inside package bodies (Nissen and Wallis 1984) if you
    cannot use a private child package.
  - Minimize nesting program units inside subprograms and tasks.
  - Minimize the scope within which with clauses apply.
  - Only with those units directly needed.
  - Carefully consider encapsulation of tasks.

#### exceptions

  - For unavoidable internal errors for which no user recovery is
    possible, declare a single user-visible exception. Inside the
    abstraction, provide a way to distinguish between the different
    internal errors.
  - Do not borrow an exception name from another context.
  - Export (declare visibly to the user) the names of all exceptions
    that can be raised.
  - In a package, document which exceptions can be raised by each
    subprogram and task entry.
  - Do not raise exceptions for internal errors that can be avoided or
    corrected within the unit.
  - Do not raise the same exception to report different kinds of errors
    that are distinguishable by the user of the unit.
  - Provide interrogative functions that allow the user of a unit to
    avoid causing exceptions to be raised.
  - When possible, avoid changing state information in a unit before
    raising an exception.
  - Catch and convert or handle all predefined and compiler-defined
    exceptions at the earliest opportunity.
  - Do not explicitly raise predefined or implementation-defined
    exceptions.
  - Never let an exception propagate beyond its scope.
:::note

This page of the "Ada Quality and Style Guide" has been adapted from the
original work at https://en.wikibooks.org/wiki/Ada_Style_Guide, which is
licensed under the
[Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/);
additional terms may apply.  Page not endorsed by Wikibooks or the Ada
Style Guide Wikibook authors. This page is licensed under the same license
as the original work.

:::
