---
title: 6. Concurrency
sidebar_position: 6
---

Concurrency exists as either apparent concurrency or real concurrency.
In a single processor environment, apparent concurrency is the result of
interleaved execution of concurrent activities. In a multiprocessor
environment, real concurrency is the result of overlapped execution of
concurrent activities.

Concurrent programming is more difficult and error prone than sequential
programming. The concurrent programming features of Ada are designed to
make it easier to write and maintain concurrent programs that behave
consistently and predictably and avoid such problems as deadlock and
starvation. The language features themselves cannot guarantee that
programs have these desirable properties. They must be used with
discipline and care, a process supported by the guidelines in this
chapter.

The correct usage of Ada concurrency features results in reliable,
reusable, and portable software. Protected objects (added in Ada 95)
encapsulate and provide synchronized access to their private data
(Rationale 1995, Â§II.9). Protected objects help you manage shared data
without incurring a performance penalty. Tasks model concurrent
activities and use the rendezvous to synchronize between cooperating
concurrent tasks. Much of the synchronization required between tasks
involves data synchronization, which can be accomplished most
efficiently, in general, using protected objects. Misuse of language
features results in software that is unverifiable and difficult to reuse
or port. For example, using task priorities or delays to manage
synchronization is not portable. It is also important that a reusable
component not make assumptions about the order or speed of task
execution (i.e., about the compiler's tasking implementation).

Although concurrent features such as tasks and protected objects are
supported by the core Ada language, care should be taken when using
these features with implementations that do not specifically support
Annex D (Real-Time Systems). If Annex D is not specifically supported,
features required for real-time applications might not be implemented.

Guidelines in this chapter are frequently worded "consider . . ."
because hard and fast rules cannot apply in all situations. The specific
choice you make in a given situation involves design tradeoffs. The
rationale for these guidelines is intended to give you insight into some
of these tradeoffs.
