---
title: 5.3 Types
---

In addition to determining the possible values for variables and subtype
names, type distinctions can be very valuable aids in developing safe,
readable, and understandable code. Types clarify the structure of your
data and can limit or restrict the operations performed on that data.

<i>
  "Keeping types distinct has been found to be a very powerful means of detecting logical mistakes
  when a program is written and to give valuable assistance whenever the program is being
  subsequently maintained"
</i> (Pyle 1985 ). Take advantage of Ada's strong typing capability in the form of subtypes, derived
types, task types, protected types, private types, and limited private types.

The guidelines encourage much code to be written to ensure strong
typing. While it might appear that there would be execution penalties
for this amount of code, this is usually not the case. In contrast to
other conventional languages, Ada has a less direct relationship between
the amount of code that is written and the size of the resulting
executable program. Most of the strong type checking is performed at
compilation time rather than execution time, so the size of the
executable code is not greatly affected.

For guidelines on specific kinds of data structures and tagged types,
see 9.2.1 , respectively.

### Derived Types and Subtypes

#### guideline

- Use existing types as building blocks by deriving new types from
  them.
- Use range constraints on subtypes.
- Define new types, especially derived types, to include the largest
  set of possible values, including boundary values.
- Constrain the ranges of derived types with subtypes, excluding
  boundary values.
- Use type derivation rather than type extension when there are no
  meaningful components to add to the type.

#### example

Type `Table` is a building block for the creation of new types:

    type Table is
       record
          Count : List_Size  := Empty;
          List  : Entry_List := Empty_List;
       end record;
    type Telephone_Directory  is new Table;
    type Department_Inventory is new Table;

The following are distinct types that cannot be intermixed in operations
that are not programmed explicitly to use them both:

    type Dollars is new Number;
    type Cents   is new Number;

Below, `Source_Tail` has a value outside the range of `Listing_Paper`
when the line is empty. All the indices can be mixed in expressions, as
long as the results fall within the correct subtypes:

    type Columns          is range First_Column - 1 .. Listing_Width + 1;

    subtype Listing_Paper is Columns range First_Column .. Listing_Width;
    subtype Dumb_Terminal is Columns range First_Column .. Dumb_Terminal_Width;
    type Line             is array (Columns range <>) of Bytes;
    subtype Listing_Line  is Line (Listing_Paper);
    subtype Terminal_Line is Line (Dumb_Terminal);
    Source_Tail : Columns       := Columns'First;
    Source      : Listing_Line;
    Destination : Terminal_Line;
    ...
    Destination(Destination'First .. Source_Tail - Destination'Last) :=
          Source(Columns'Succ(Destination'Last) .. Source_Tail);

#### rationale

The name of a derived type can make clear its intended use and avoid
proliferation of similar type definitions. Objects of two derived types,
even though derived from the same type, cannot be mixed in operations
unless such operations are supplied explicitly or one is converted to
the other explicitly. This prohibition is an enforcement of strong
typing.

Define new types, derived types, and subtypes cautiously and
deliberately. The concepts of subtype and derived type are not
equivalent, but they can be used to advantage in concert. A subtype
limits the range of possible values for a type but does not define a new
type.

Types can have highly constrained sets of values without eliminating
useful values. Used in concert, derived types and subtypes can eliminate
many flag variables and type conversions within executable statements.
This renders the program more readable, enforces the abstraction, and
allows the compiler to enforce strong typing constraints.

Many algorithms begin or end with values just outside the normal range.
If boundary values are not compatible within subexpressions, algorithms
can be needlessly complicated. The program can become cluttered with
flag variables and special cases when it could just test for zero or
some other sentinel value just outside normal range.

The type `Columns` and the subtype `Listing_Paper` in the example above
demonstrate how to allow sentinel values. The subtype `Listing_Paper`
could be used as the type for parameters of subprograms declared in the
specification of a package. This would restrict the range of values that
could be specified by the caller. Meanwhile, the type `Columns` could be
used to store such values internally to the body of the package,
allowing `First_Column - 1` to be used as a sentinel value. This
combination of types and subtypes allows compatibility between subtypes
within subexpressions without type conversions as would happen with
derived types.

The choice between type derivation and type extension depends on what
kind of changes you expect to occur to objects in the type. In general,
type derivation is a very simple form of inheritance: the derived types
inherit the structure, operations, and values of the parent type
(Rationale 1995, ยง4.2 ). Although you can add operations, you cannot
augment the data structure. You can derive from either scalar or
composite types.

Type extension is a more powerful form of inheritance, only applied to
`tagged` records, in which you can augment both the type's components
and operations. When the record implements an abstraction with the
potential for reuse and/or extension, it is a good candidate for making
it `tagged`. Similarly, if the abstraction is a member of a family of
abstractions with well-defined variable and common properties, you
should consider a `tagged` record.

#### notes

The price of the reduction in the number of independent type
declarations is that subtypes and derived types change when the base
type is redefined. This trickle-down of changes is sometimes a blessing
and sometimes a curse. However, usually it is intended and beneficial.

### Anonymous Types

#### guideline

- Avoid anonymous array types.
- Use anonymous array types for array variables only when no suitable
  type exists or can be created and the array will not be referenced
  as a whole (e.g., used as a subprogram parameter).
- Use access parameters and access discriminants to guarantee that the
  parameter or discriminant is treated as a constant.

#### example

Use:

    type Buffer_Index is range 1 .. 80;
    type Buffer       is array (Buffer_Index) of Character;
    Input_Line : Buffer;

rather than:

    Input_Line : array (Buffer_Index) of Character;

#### rationale

Although Ada allows anonymous types, they have limited usefulness and
complicate program modification. For example, except for arrays, a
variable of anonymous type can never be used as an actual parameter
because it is not possible to define a formal parameter of the same
type. Even though this may not be a limitation initially, it precludes a
modification in which a piece of code is changed to a subprogram.
Although you can declare the anonymous array to be aliased, you cannot
use this access value as an actual parameter in a subprogram because the
subprogram's formal parameter declaration requires a type mark. Also,
two variables declared using the same anonymous type declaration are
actually of different types.

Even though the implicit conversion of array types during parameter
passing is supported in Ada, it is difficult to justify not using the
type of the parameter. In most situations, the type of the parameter is
visible and easily substituted in place of an anonymous array type. The
use of an anonymous array type implies that the array is only being used
as a convenient way to implement a collection of values. It is
misleading to use an anonymous type, and then treat the variable as an
object.

When you use an access parameter or access discriminant, the anonymous
type is essentially declared inside the subprogram or object itself
(Rationale 1995, ยง3.7.1 ). Thus, you have no way of declaring another
object of the same type, and the object is treated as a constant. In the
case of a self-referential data structure (see

` Guideline 5.4.6 ), you need the access parameter to be able to`

manipulate the data the discriminant accesses (Rationale 1995, ยง3.7.1 ).

#### notes

For anonymous task types, see Guideline 6.1.4 .

#### exceptions

If you are creating a unique table, for example, the periodic table of
the elements, consider using an anonymous array type.

### Private Types

#### guideline

- Derive from controlled types in preference to using limited private
  types.
- Use limited private types in preference to private types.
- Use private types in preference to nonprivate types.
- Explicitly export needed operations rather than easing restrictions.

#### example

    ------------------------------------------------------------------------
    with Ada.Finalization;
    package Packet_Telemetry is
       type Frame_Header is new Ada.Finalization.Controlled with private;
       type Frame_Data   is private;
       type Frame_Codes  is (Main_Bus_Voltage, Transmitter_1_Power);
       ...
    private
       type Frame_Header is new Ada.Finalization.Controlled with
          record
             ...
          end record;
       -- override adjustment and finalization to get correct assignment semantics
       procedure Adjust (Object : in out Frame_Header);
       procedure Finalize (Object : in out Frame_Header);
       type Frame_Data is
          record
             ...
          end record;
       ...
    end Packet_Telemetry;
    ------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### rationale

Limited private types and private types support abstraction and
information hiding better than nonprivate types. The more restricted the
type, the better information hiding is served. This, in turn, allows the
implementation to change without affecting the rest of the program.
While there are many valid reasons to export types, it is better to try
the preferred route first, loosening the restrictions only as necessary.
If it is necessary for a user of the package to use a few of the
restricted operations, it is better to export the operations explicitly
and individually via exported subprograms than to drop a level of
restriction. This practice retains the restrictions on other operations.

Limited private types have the most restricted set of operations
available to users of a package. Of the types that must be made
available to users of a package, as many as possible should be derived
from the controlled types or limited private. Controlled types give you
the ability to adjust assignment and to finalize values, so you no
longer need to create limited private types to guarantee a client that
assignment and equality obey deep copy/comparison semantics. Therefore,
it is possible to export a slightly less restrictive type (i.e., private
type that extends `Ada.Finalization.Controlled`) that has an adjustable
assignment operator and overridable equality operator. See also
Guideline 5.4.5 .

The operations available to limited private types are membership tests,
selected components, components for the selections of any discriminant,
qualification and explicit conversion, and attributes `'Base` and
`'Size`. Objects of a limited private type also have the attribute
`'Constrained` if there are discriminants. None of these operations
allows the user of the package to manipulate objects in a way that
depends on the structure of the type.

#### notes

The predefined packages `Direct_IO` and `Sequential_IO`do not accept
limited private types as generic parameters. This restriction should be
considered when I/O operations are needed for a type.

See Guideline 8.3.3 for a discussion of the use of private and limited
private types in generic units.

### Subprogram Access Types

#### guideline

- Use access-to-subprogram types for indirect access to subprograms.
- Wherever possible, use abstract tagged types and dispatching rather
  than access-to-subprogram types to implement dynamic selection and
  invocation of subprograms.

#### example

The following example is taken from the Rationale (1995, ยง3.7.2) :

    generic
       type Float_Type is digits <>;
    package Generic_Integration is
       type Integrand is access function (X : Float_Type) return Float_Type;
       function Integrate (F        : Integrand;
                           From     : Float_Type;
                           To       : Float_Type;
                           Accuracy : Float_Type := 10.0*Float_Type'Model_Epsilon)
         return Float_Type;
    end Generic_Integration;
    with Generic_Integration;
    procedure Try_Estimate (External_Data : in     Data_Type;
                            Lower         : in     Float;
                            Upper         : in     Float;
                            Answer        :    out Float) is
       -- external data set by other means
       function Residue (X : Float) return Float is
          Result : Float;
       begin  -- Residue
          -- compute function value dependent upon external data
          return Result;
       end Residue;
       package Float_Integration is
          new Generic_Integration (Float_Type => Float);

       use Float_Integration;
    begin -- Try_Estimate
       ...
       Answer := Integrate (F    => Residue'Access,
                            From => Lower,
                            To   => Upper);
    end Try_Estimate;

#### rationale

Access-to-subprogram types allow you to create data structures that
contain subprogram references. There are many uses for this feature, for
instance, implementing state machines, call backs in the X Window
System, iterators (the operation to be applied to each element of a
list), and numerical algorithms (e.g., integration function) (Rationale
1995, ยง3.7.2 ).

You can achieve the same effect as access-to-subprogram types for
dynamic selection by using abstract tagged types. You declare an
abstract type with one abstract operation and then use an
access-to-class-wide type to get the dispatching effect. This technique
provides greater flexibility and type safety than access-to-subprogram
types (Ada Reference Manual 1995, ยง3.10.2 ).

Access-to-subprogram types are useful in implementing dynamic selection.
References to the subprograms can be stored directly in the data
structure. In a finite state machine, for example, a single data
structure can describe the action to be taken on state transitions.
Strong type checking is maintained because Ada 95 requires that the
designated subprogram has the same parameter/result profile as the one
specified in the subprogram access type.

See also Guideline 7.3.2 .
