---
title: 5.4 Data Structures
---

The data structuring capabilities of Ada are a powerful resource;
therefore, use them to model the data as closely as possible. It is
possible to group logically related data and let the language control
the abstraction and operations on the data rather than requiring the
programmer or maintainer to do so. Data can also be organized in a
building block fashion. In addition to showing how a data structure is
organized (and possibly giving the reader an indication as to why it was
organized that way), creating the data structure from smaller components
allows those components to be reused. Using the features that Ada
provides can increase the maintainability of your code.

### Discriminated Records

#### guideline

- When declaring a discriminant, use as constrained a subtype as
  possible (i.e., subtype with as specific a range constraint as
  possible).
- Use a discriminated record rather than a constrained array to
  represent an array whose actual values are unconstrained.

#### example

An object of type `Name_Holder_1` could potentially hold a string whose
length is `Natural'Last`:

    type Number_List is array (Integer range <>) of Integer;

    type Number_Holder_1 (Current_Length : Natural := 0) is
       record
          Numbers : Number_List (1 .. Current_Length);
       end record;

An object of type `Name_Holder_2` imposes a more reasonable restriction
on the length of its string component:

    type    Number_List is array (Integer range <>) of Integer;
    subtype Max_Numbers is Natural range 0 .. 42;

    type Number_Holder_2 (Current_Length : Max_Numbers := 0) is
       record
          Numbers : Number_List (1 .. Current_Length);
       end record;

#### rationale

When you use the discriminant to constrain an array inside a
discriminated record, the larger the range of values the discriminant
can assume, the more space an object of the type might require. Although
your program may compile and link, it will fail at execution when the
run-time system is unable to create an object of the potential size
required.

The discriminated record captures the intent of an array whose bounds
may vary at run-time. A simple constrained array definition (e.g., `type Number_List is array (1 .. 42) of Integer;`) does not capture the intent
that there are at most 42 possible numbers in the list.

### Heterogeneous Related Data

#### guideline

- Use records to group heterogeneous but related data.
- Consider records to map to I/O device data.

#### example

    type Propulsion_Method is (Sail, Diesel, Nuclear);
    type Craft is
       record
          Name   : Common_Name;
          Plant  : Propulsion_Method;
          Length : Feet;
          Beam   : Feet;
          Draft  : Feet;
       end record;
    type Fleet is array (1 .. Fleet_Size) of Craft;

#### rationale

You help the maintainer find all of the related data by gathering it
into the same construct, simplifying any modifications that apply to all
rather than part. This, in turn, increases reliability. Neither you nor
an unknown maintainer is liable to forget to deal with all the pieces of
information in the executable statements, especially if updates are done
with aggregate assignments whenever possible.

The idea is to put the information a maintainer needs to know where it
can be found with the minimum of effort. For example, if all information
relating to a given `Craft` is in the same place, the relationship is
clear both in the declarations and especially in the code accessing and
updating that information. But, if it is scattered among several data
structures, it is less obvious that this is an intended relationship as
opposed to a coincidental one. In the latter case, the declarations may
be grouped together to imply intent, but it may not be possible to group
the accessing and updating code that way. Ensuring the use of the same
index to access the corresponding element in each of several parallel
arrays is difficult if the accesses are at all scattered.

If the application must interface directly to hardware, the use of
records, especially in conjunction with record representation clauses,
could be useful to map onto the layout of the hardware in question.

#### notes

It may seem desirable to store heterogeneous data in parallel arrays in
what amounts to a FORTRAN-like style. This style is an artifact of
FORTRAN's data structuring limitations. FORTRAN only has facilities for
constructing homogeneous arrays.

#### exceptions

If the application must interface directly to hardware, and the hardware
requires that information be distributed among various locations, then
it may not be possible to use records.

### Heterogeneous Polymorphic Data

#### guideline

- Use access types to class-wide types to implement heterogeneous
  polymorphic data structures.
- Use tagged types and type extension rather than variant records (in
  combination with enumeration types and case statements).

#### example

An array of type `Employee_List` can contain pointers to part-time and
full-time employees (and possibly other kinds of employees in the
future):

    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    package Personnel is
       type Employee  is tagged limited private;
       type Reference is access all Employee'Class;
       ...
    private
       ...
    end Personnel;
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    with Personnel;
    package Part_Time_Staff is
       type Part_Time_Employee is new Personnel.Employee with
          record
             ...
          end record;
       ...
    end Part_Time_Staff;
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
    with Personnel;
    package Full_Time_Staff is
       type Full_Time_Employee is new Personnel.Employee with
          record
             ...
          end record;
       ...
    end Full_Time_Staff;
    -----------------------------------------------------------------------------------

    ...

    type Employee_List is array (Positive range <>) of Personnel.Reference;

    Current_Employees : Employee_List (1..10);

    ...

    Current_Employees(1) := new Full_Time_Staff.Full_Time_Employee;
    Current_Employees(2) := new Part_Time_Staff.Part_Time_Employee;
    ...

#### rationale

Polymorphism is a means of factoring out the differences among a
collection of abstractions so that programs may be written in terms of
the common properties. Polymorphism allows the different objects in a
heterogeneous data structure to be treated the same way, based on
dispatching operations defined on the root tagged type. This eliminates
the need for `case` statements to select the processing required for
each specific type. Guideline 5.6.3 discusses the maintenance impact of
using `case` statements.

Enumeration types, variant records, and case statements are hard to
maintain because the expertise on a given variant of the data type tends
to be spread all over the program. When you create a tagged type
hierarchy (tagged types and type extension), you can avoid the variant
records, case statement, and single enumeration type that only supports
the variant record discriminant. Moreover, you localize the
_"expertise"_ about the variant within the data structure by having all
the corresponding primitives for a single operation call common
_"operation-specific"_ code.

See also Guideline 9.2.1 for a more detailed discussion of tagged types.

#### exceptions

In some instances, you may want to use a variant record approach to
organize modularity around operations. For graphic output, for example,
you may find it more maintainable to use variant records. You must make
the tradeoff of whether adding a new operation will be less work than
adding a new variant.

### Nested Records

#### guideline

- Record structures should not always be flat. Factor out common
  parts.
- For a large record structure, group related components into smaller
  subrecords.
- For nested records, pick element names that read well when inner
  elements are referenced.
- Consider using type extension to organize large data structures.

#### example

    type Coordinate is
       record
          Row    : Local_Float;
          Column : Local_Float;
       end record;
    type Window is
       record
          Top_Left     : Coordinate;
          Bottom_Right : Coordinate;
       end record;

#### rationale

You can make complex data structures understandable and comprehensible
by composing them of familiar building blocks. This technique works
especially well for large record types with parts that fall into natural
groupings. The components factored into separately declared records,
based on a common quality or purpose, correspond to a lower level of
abstraction than that represented by the larger record.

When designing a complex data structure, you must consider whether type
composition or type extension is the best suited technique. Type
composition refers to creating a record component whose type is itself a
record. You will often need a hybrid of these techniques, that is, some
components you include through type composition and others you create
through type extension. Type extension may provide a cleaner design if
the "intermediate" records are all instances of the same abstraction
family. See also Guidelines 5.4.2 and 9.2.1 .

#### notes

A carefully chosen name for the component of the larger record that is
used to select the smaller enhances readability, for example:

    if Window1.Bottom_Right.Row > Window2.Top_Left.Row then . . .

### Dynamic Data

#### guideline

- Differentiate between static and dynamic data. Use dynamically
  allocated objects with caution.
- Use dynamically allocated data structures only when it is necessary
  to create and destroy them dynamically or to be able to reference
  them by different names.
- Do not drop pointers to undeallocated objects.
- Do not leave dangling references to deallocated objects.
- Initialize all access variables and components within a record.
- Do not rely on memory deallocation.
- Deallocate explicitly.
- Use length clauses to specify total allocation size.
- Provide handlers for `Storage_Error`.
- Use controlled types to implement private types that manipulate
  dynamic data.
- Avoid unconstrained record objects unless your run-time environment
  reliably reclaims dynamic heap storage.
- Unless your run-time environment reliably reclaims dynamic heap
  storage, declare the following items only in the outermost, unnested
  declarative part of either a library package, a main subprogram, or
  a permanent task:
  - Access types
  - Constrained composite objects with nonstatic bounds
  - Objects of an unconstrained composite type other than
    unconstrained records
  - Composite objects large enough (at compile time) for the
    compiler to allocate implicitly on the heap
- Unless your run-time environment reliably reclaims dynamic heap
  storage or you are creating permanent, dynamically allocated tasks,
  avoid declaring tasks in the following situations:
  - Unconstrained array subtypes whose components are tasks
  - Discriminated record subtypes containing a component that is an
    array of tasks, where the array size depends on the value of the
    discriminant
  - Any declarative region other than the outermost, unnested
    declarative part of either a library package or a main
    subprogram
  - Arrays of tasks that are not statically constrained

#### example

These lines show how a dangling reference might be created:

    P1 := new Object;
    P2 := P1;
    Unchecked_Object_Deallocation(P2);

This line can raise an exception due to referencing the deallocated
object:

    X := P1.all;

In the following three lines, if there is no intervening assignment of
the value of `P1` to any other pointer, the object created on the first
line is no longer accessible after the third line. The only pointer to
the allocated object has been dropped:

    P1 := new Object;
    ...
    P1 := P2;

The following code shows an example of using `Finalize` to make sure
that when an object is finalized (i.e., goes out of scope), the
dynamically allocated elements are chained on a free list:

    with Ada.Finalization;
    package List is
       type Object is private;
       function &quot;=&quot; (Left, Right : Object) return Boolean;  -- element-by-element comparison
       ... -- Operations go here
    private
       type Handle is access List.Object;
       type Object is new Ada.Finalization.Controlled with
          record
             Next : List.Handle;
             ... -- Useful information go here
          end record;
       procedure Adjust (L : in out List.Object);
       procedure Finalize (L : in out List.Object);
    end List;
    package body List is
       Free_List : List.Handle;
       ...
       procedure Adjust (L : in out List.Object) is
       begin
          L := Deep_Copy (L);
       end Adjust;
       procedure Finalize (L : in out List.Object) is
       begin
          -- Chain L to Free_List
       end Finalize;
    end List;

#### rationale

See also 6.3.2 for variations on these problems. A dynamically allocated
object is an object created by the execution of an allocator (`new`).
Allocated objects referenced by access variables allow you to generate
aliases _,_ which are multiple references to the same object. Anomalous
behavior can arise when you reference a deallocated object by another
name. This is called a dangling reference. Totally disassociating a
still-valid object from all names is called dropping a pointer. A
dynamically allocated object that is not associated with a name cannot
be referenced or explicitly deallocated.

A dropped pointer depends on an implicit memory manager for reclamation
of space. It also raises questions for the reader as to whether the loss
of access to the object was intended or accidental.

An Ada environment is not required to provide deallocation of
dynamically allocated objects. If provided, it may be provided
implicitly (objects are deallocated when their access type goes out of
scope), explicitly (objects are deallocated when
`Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation` is called), or both. To increase the
likelihood of the storage space being reclaimed, it is best to call
`Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation` explicitly for each dynamically created
object when you are finished using it. Calls to
`Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation` also document a deliberate decision to
abandon an object, making the code easier to read and understand. To be
absolutely certain that space is reclaimed and reused, manage your own

<i>"free list."</i> Keep track of which objects you are finished with, and reuse them instead of dynamically
allocating new objects later.

The dangers of dangling references are that you may attempt to use them,
thereby accessing memory that you have released to the memory manager
and that may have been subsequently allocated for another purpose in
another part of your program. When you read from such memory, unexpected
errors may occur because the other part of your program may have
previously written totally unrelated data there. Even worse, when you
write to such memory you can cause errors in an apparently unrelated
part of the code by changing values of variables dynamically allocated
by that code. This type of error can be very difficult to find. Finally,
such errors may be triggered in parts of your environment that you did
not write, for example, in the memory management system itself, which
may dynamically allocate memory to keep records about your dynamically
allocated memory.

Keep in mind that any unreset component of a record or array can also be
a dangling reference or carry a bit pattern representing inconsistent
data. Components of an access type are always initialized by default to
`null`; however, you should not rely on this default initialization. To
enhance readability and maintainability, you should include explicit
initialization.

Whenever you use dynamic allocation, it is possible to run out of space.
Ada provides a facility (a length clause) for requesting the size of the
pool of allocation space at compile time. Anticipate that you can still
run out at run time. Prepare handlers for the exception `Storage_Error`,
and consider carefully what alternatives you may be able to include in
the program for each such situation.

There is a school of thought that dictates avoidance of all dynamic
allocation. It is largely based on the fear of running out of memory
during execution. Facilities, such as length clauses and exception
handlers for `Storage_Error`, provide explicit control over memory
partitioning and error recovery, making this fear unfounded.

When implementing a complex data structure (tree, list, sparse matrices,
etc.), you often use access types. If you are not careful, you can
consume all your storage with these dynamically allocated objects. You
could export a deallocate operation, but it is impossible to ensure that
it is called at the proper places; you are, in effect, trusting the
clients. If you derive from controlled types (see 8.3.3 , and 9.2.3 for
more information), you can use finalization to deal with deallocation of
dynamic data, thus avoiding storage exhaustion. User-defined storage
pools give better control over the allocation policy.

A related but distinct issue is that of shared versus copy semantics:
even if the data structure is implemented using access types, you do not
necessarily want shared semantics. In some instances you really want`:=`
to create a copy, not a new reference, and you really want `=` to
compare the contents, not the reference. You should implement your
structure as a controlled type. If you want copy semantics, you can
redefine `Adjust` to perform a deep copy and `=` to perform a comparison
on the contents. You can also redefine `Finalize` to make sure that when
an object is finalized (i.e., goes out of scope) the dynamically
allocated elements are chained on a free list (or deallocated by
`Ada.Unchecked_Deallocation`).

The implicit use of dynamic (heap) storage by an Ada program during
execution poses significant risks that software failures may occur. An
Ada run-time environment may use implicit dynamic (heap) storage in
association with composite objects, dynamically created tasks, and
catenation. Often, the algorithms used to manage the dynamic allocation
and reclamation of heap storage cause fragmentation or leakage, which
can lead to storage exhaustion. It is usually very difficult or
impossible to recover from storage exhaustion or `Storage_Error` without
reloading and restarting the Ada program. It would be very restrictive
to avoid all uses of implicit allocation. On the other hand, preventing
both explicit and implicit deallocation significantly reduces the risks
of fragmentation and leakage without overly restricting your use of
composite objects, access values, task objects, and catenation.

#### exceptions

If a composite object is large enough to be allocated on the heap, you
can still declare it as an `in` or `in out` formal parameter. The
guideline is meant to discourage declaring the object in an object
declaration, a formal `out` parameter, or the value returned by a
function.

You should monitor the leakage and/or fragmentation from the heap. If
they become steady-state and do not continually increase during program
or partition execution, you can use the constructs described in the
guidelines.

### Aliased Objects

#### guideline

- Minimize the use of aliased variables.
- Use aliasing for statically created, ragged arrays (Rationale 1995,
  §3.7.1 ).
- Use aliasing to refer to part of a data structure when you want to
  hide the internal connections and bookkeeping information.

#### example

    package Message_Services is
       type Message_Code_Type is range 0 .. 100;
       subtype Message is String;
       function Get_Message (Message_Code: Message_Code_Type)
         return Message;
       pragma Inline (Get_Message);
    end Message_Services;
    package body Message_Services is
       type Message_Handle is access constant Message;
       Message_0 : aliased constant Message := &quot;OK&quot;;
       Message_1 : aliased constant Message := &quot;Up&quot;;
       Message_2 : aliased constant Message := &quot;Shutdown&quot;;
       Message_3 : aliased constant Message := &quot;Shutup&quot;;
       . . .
       type Message_Table_Type is array (Message_Code_Type) of Message_Handle;

       Message_Table : Message_Table_Type :=
         (0 => Message_0'Access,
          1 => Message_1'Access,
          2 => Message_2'Access,
          3 => Message_3'Access,
          -- etc.
         );
       function Get_Message (Message_Code : Message_Code_Type)
         return Message is
       begin
          return Message_Table (Message_Code).all;
       end Get_Message;
    end Message_Services;

The following code fragment shows a use of aliased objects, using the
attribute `'Access` to implement a generic component that manages hashed
collections of objects:

    generic
       type Hash_Index is mod <>;
       type Object is tagged private;
       type Handle is access all Object;
       with function Hash (The_Object : in Object) return Hash_Index;
    package Collection is
       function Insert (Object : in Collection.Object) return Collection.Handle;
       function Find (Object : in Collection.Object) return Collection.Handle;
       Object_Not_Found : exception;

       ...
    private
       type Cell;
       type Access_Cell is access Cell;
    end Collection;
    package body Collection is
       type Cell is
       record
          Value : aliased Collection.Object;
          Link  : Access_Cell;
       end record;
       type Table_Type is array (Hash_Index) of Access_Cell;

       Table : Table_Type;
       -- Go through the collision chain and return an access to the useful data.
       function Find (Object : in Collection.Object;
                      Index  : in Hash_Index) return Handle is
          Current : Access_Cell := Table (Index);
       begin
          while Current /= null loop
             if Current.Value = Object then
                return Current.Value'Access;
             else
                Current := Current.Link;
             end if;
          end loop;
          raise Object_Not_Found;
       end Find;
       -- The exported one
       function Find (Object : in Collection.Object) return Collection.Handle is
          Index : constant Hash_Index := Hash (Object);
       begin
          return Find (Object, Index);
       end Find;
       ...
    end Collection;

#### rationale

Aliasing allows the programmer to have indirect access to declared
objects. Because you can update aliased objects through more than one
path, you must exercise caution to avoid unintended updates. When you
restrict the aliased objects to being constant, you avoid having the
object unintentionally modified. In the example above, the individual
message objects are aliased constant message strings so their values
cannot be changed. The ragged array is then initialized with references
to each of these constant strings.

Aliasing allows you to manipulate objects using indirection while
avoiding dynamic allocation. For example, you can insert an object onto
a linked list without dynamically allocating the space for that object
(Rationale 1995, §3.7.1 ).

Another use of aliasing is in a linked data structure in which you try
to hide the enclosing container. This is essentially the inverse of a
self-referential data structure (see Guideline 5.4.7 ). If a package
manages some data using a linked data structure, you may only want to
export access values that denote the _"useful"_ data. You can use an
access-to-object to return an access to the useful data, excluding the
pointers used to chain objects.

### Access Discriminants

#### guideline

- Use access discriminants to create self-referential data structures,
  i.e., a data structure one of whose components points to the
  enclosing structure.

#### example

See the examples in Guidelines 8.3.6 (using access discriminants to
build an iterator) and 9.5.1 (using access discriminants in multiple
inheritance).

#### rationale

The access discriminant is essentially a pointer of an anonymous type
being used as a discriminant. Because the access discriminant is of an
anonymous access type, you cannot declare other objects of the type.
Thus, once you initialize the discriminant, you create a "permanent"
(for the lifetime of the object) association between the discriminant
and the object it accesses. When you create a self-referential
structure, that is, a component of the structure is initialized to point
to the enclosing object, the _"constant"_ behavior of the access
discriminant provides the right behavior to help you maintain the
integrity of the structure.

See also Rationale (1995, §4.6.3) for a discussion of access
discriminants to achieve multiple views of an object.

See also Guideline 6.1.3 for an example of an access discriminant for a
task type.

### Modular Types

#### guideline

- Use modular types rather than Boolean arrays when you create data
  structures that need bit-wise operations, such as `and` and `or`.

#### example

    with Interfaces;
    procedure Main is
       type Unsigned_Byte is mod 255;

       X : Unsigned_Byte;
       Y : Unsigned_Byte;
       Z : Unsigned_Byte;
       X1 : Interfaces.Unsigned_16;
    begin -- Main
       Z := X or Y;  -- does not cause overflow

       -- Show example of left shift
       X1 := 16#FFFF#;
       for Counter in 1 .. 16 loop
          X1 := Interfaces.Shift_Left (Value => X1, Amount => 1);
       end loop;
    end Main;

#### rationale

Modular types are preferred when the number of bits is known to be fewer
than the number of bits in a word and/or performance is a serious
concern. Boolean arrays are appropriate when the number of bits is not
particularly known in advance and performance is not a serious issue.
See also Guideline 10.6.3 .
