---
title: 5. Programming Practices
sidebar_position: 5
---

Software is always subject to change. The need for this change,
euphemistically known as _"maintenance"_ arises from a variety of
sources. Errors need to be corrected as they are discovered. System
functionality may need to be enhanced in planned or unplanned ways.
Inevitably, the requirements change over the lifetime of the system,
forcing continual system evolution. Often, these modifications are
conducted long after the software was originally written, usually by
someone other than the original author.

Easy and successful modification requires that the software be readable,
understandable, and structured according to accepted practice. If a
software component cannot be easily understood by a programmer who is
familiar with its intended function, that software component is not
maintainable. Techniques that make code readable and comprehensible
enhance its maintainability. Previous chapters presented techniques such
as consistent use of naming conventions, clear and well-organized
commentary, and proper modularization. This chapter presents consistent
and logical use of language features.

Correctness is one aspect of reliability. While style guidelines cannot
enforce the use of correct algorithms, they can suggest the use of
techniques and language features known to reduce the number or
likelihood of failures. Such techniques include program construction
methods that reduce the likelihood of errors or that improve program
predictability by defining behavior in the presence of errors.
