---
title: 8.2 Robustness
---

The following guidelines improve the robustness of Ada code. It is easy
to write code that depends on an assumption that you do not realize that
you are making. When such a part is reused in a different environment,
it can break unexpectedly. The guidelines in this section show some ways
in which Ada code can be made to automatically conform to its
environment and some ways in which it can be made to check for
violations of assumptions. Finally, some guidelines are given to warn
you about errors that Ada does not catch as soon as you might like.

### Named Numbers

#### guideline

- Use named numbers and static expressions to allow multiple
  dependencies to be linked to a small number of symbols.

#### example

```ada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
procedure Disk_Driver is
   -- In this procedure, a number of important disk parameters are
   -- linked.
   Number_Of_Sectors  : constant :=     4;
   Number_Of_Tracks   : constant :=   200;
   Number_Of_Surfaces : constant :=    18;
   Sector_Capacity    : constant := 4_096;
   Track_Capacity   : constant := Number_Of_Sectors  * Sector_Capacity;
   Surface_Capacity : constant := Number_Of_Tracks   * Track_Capacity;
   Disk_Capacity    : constant := Number_Of_Surfaces * Surface_Capacity;
   type Sector_Range  is range 1 .. Number_Of_Sectors;
   type Track_Range   is range 1 .. Number_Of_Tracks;
   type Surface_Range is range 1 .. Number_Of_Surfaces;
   type Track_Map   is array (Sector_Range)  of ...;
   type Surface_Map is array (Track_Range)   of Track_Map;
   type Disk_Map    is array (Surface_Range) of Surface_Map;
begin  -- Disk_Driver
   ...
end Disk_Driver;
------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

To reuse software that uses named numbers and static expressions
appropriately, just one or a small number of constants need to be reset,
and all declarations and associated code are changed automatically.
Apart from easing reuse, this reduces the number of opportunities for
error and documents the meanings of the types and constants without
using error-prone comments.

### Unconstrained Arrays

#### guideline

- Use unconstrained array types for array formal parameters and array
  return values.
- Make the size of local variables depend on actual parameter size,
  where appropriate.

#### example

```ada
   ...
   type Vector is array (Vector_Index range <>) of Element;
   type Matrix is array
           (Vector_Index range <>, Vector_Index range <>) of Element;
   ...
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
   procedure Matrix_Operation (Data : in     Matrix) is
      Workspace   : Matrix (Data'Range(1), Data'Range(2));
      Temp_Vector : Vector (Data'First(1) .. 2 * Data'Last(1));
   ...
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

Unconstrained arrays can be declared with their sizes dependent on
formal parameter sizes. When used as local variables, their sizes change
automatically with the supplied actual parameters. This facility can be
used to assist in the adaptation of a part because necessary size
changes in local variables are taken care of automatically.

### Minimizing and Documenting Assumptions

#### guideline

- Minimize the number of assumptions made by a unit.
- For assumptions that cannot be avoided, use subtypes or constraints
  to automatically enforce conformance.
- For assumptions that cannot be automatically enforced by subtypes,
  add explicit checks to the code.
- Document all assumptions.
- If the code depends upon the implementation of a specific Special
  Needs Annex for proper operation, document this assumption in the
  code.

#### example

The following poorly written function documents but does not check its
assumption:

```ada
   -- Assumption:  BCD value is less than 4 digits.
   function Binary_To_BCD (Binary_Value : in     Natural)
     return BCD;
```

The next example enforces conformance with its assumption, making the
checking automatic and the comment unnecessary:

```ada
   subtype Binary_Values is Natural range 0 .. 9_999;
   function Binary_To_BCD (Binary_Value : in     Binary_Values)
     return BCD;
```

The next example explicitly checks and documents its assumption:

```ada
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
   -- Out_Of_Range raised when BCD value exceeds 4  digits.
   function Binary_To_BCD (Binary_Value : in     Natural)
     return BCD is
      Maximum_Representable : constant Natural := 9_999;
   begin  -- Binary_To_BCD
      if Binary_Value > Maximum_Representable then
         raise Out_Of_Range;
      end if;
      ...
   end Binary_To_BCD;
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

Any part that is intended to be used again in another program,
especially if the other program is likely to be written by other people,
should be robust. It should defend itself against misuse by defining its
interface to enforce as many assumptions as possible and by adding
explicit defensive checks on anything that cannot be enforced by the
interface. By documenting dependencies on a Special Needs Annex, you
warn the user that he should only reuse the component in a compilation
environment that provides the necessary support.

#### notes

You can restrict the ranges of values of the inputs by careful selection
or construction of the subtypes of the formal parameters. When you do
so, the compiler-generated checking code may be more efficient than any
checks you might write. Indeed, such checking is part of the intent of
the strong typing in the language. This presents a challenge, however,
for generic units where the user of your code selects the types of the
parameters. Your code must be constructed to deal with any value of any
subtype the user may choose to select for an instantiation.

### Subtypes in Generic Specifications

#### guideline

- Use first subtypes when declaring generic formal objects of mode in
  out.
- Beware of using subtypes as subtype marks when declaring parameters
  or return values of generic formal subprograms.
- Use attributes rather than literal values.

#### example

In the following example, it appears that any value supplied for the
generic formal object Object would be constrained to the range 1..10. It
also appears that parameters passed at run-time to the Put routine in
any instantiation and values returned by the Get routine would be
similarly constrained:

```ada
   subtype Range_1_10 is Integer range 1 .. 10;
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
   generic
      Object : in out Range_1_10;
      with procedure Put (Parameter : in     Range_1_10);
      with function  Get return Range_1_10;
   package Input_Output is
      ...
   end Input_Output;
   ---------------------------------------------------------------------
```

However, this is not the case. Given the following legal instantiation:

```ada
   subtype Range_15_30 is Integer range 15 .. 30;
   Constrained_Object : Range_15_30 := 15;
   procedure Constrained_Put (Parameter : in     Range_15_30);
   function  Constrained_Get return Range_15_30;
   package Constrained_Input_Output is
      new Input_Output (Object => Constrained_Object,
                        Put    => Constrained_Put,
                        Get    => Constrained_Get);
   ...
```

Object, Parameter, and the return value of Get are constrained to the
range 15..30. Thus, for example, if the body of the generic package
contains an assignment statement:

```ada
Object := 1;
```

Constraint_Error is raised when this instantiation is executed.

#### rationale

The language specifies that when constraint checking is performed for
generic formal objects and parameters and return values of generic
formal subprograms, the constraints of the actual subtype (not the
formal subtype) are enforced (Ada Reference Manual 1995, §§12.4"\> and
12.6).Thus, the subtype specified in a formal in out object parameter
and the subtypes specified in the profile of a formal subprogram need
not match those of the actual object or subprogram.

Thus, even with a generic unit that has been instantiated and tested
many times and with an instantiation that reported no errors at
instantiation time, there can be a run-time error. Because the subtype
constraints of the generic formal are ignored, the Ada Reference Manual
(1995, §§12.4 and 12.6) suggests using the name of a base type in such
places to avoid confusion. Even so, you must be careful not to assume
the freedom to use any value of the base type because the instantiation
imposes the subtype constraints of the generic actual parameter. To be
safe, always refer to specific values of the type via symbolic
expressions containing attributes like 'First, 'Last, 'Pred, and 'Succ
rather than via literal values.

For generics, attributes provide the means to maintain generality. It is
possible to use literal values, but literals run the risk of violating
some constraint. For example, assuming that an array's index starts at 1
may cause a problem when the generic is instantiated for a zero-based
array type.

#### notes

Adding a generic formal parameter that defines the subtype of the
generic formal object does not address the ramifications of the
constraint checking rule discussed in the above rationale. You can
instantiate the generic formal type with any allowable subtype, and you
are not guaranteed that this subtype is the first subtype:

```ada
generic
   type Object_Range is range <>;
   Objects : in out Object_Range;
   ...
package X is
   ...
end X;
```

You can instantiate the subtype Object_Range with any Integer subtype,
for example, Positive. However, the actual variable Object can be of
Positive'Base, i.e., Integer and its value are not guaranteed to be
greater than 0.

### Overloading in Generic Units

#### guideline

- Be careful about overloading the names of subprograms exported by
  the same generic package.

#### example

```ada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
generic
   type Item is limited private;
package Input_Output is
   procedure Put (Value : in     Integer);
   procedure Put (Value : in     Item);
end Input_Output;
------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

If the generic package shown in the example above is instantiated with
Integer (or any subtype of Integer) as the actual type corresponding to
generic formal Item, then the two Put procedures have identical
interfaces, and all calls to Put are ambiguous. Therefore, this package
cannot be used with type Integer. In such a case, it is better to give
unambiguous names to all subprograms. See the Ada Reference Manual
(1995, §12.3) for more information.

### Hidden Tasks

#### guideline

- Within a specification , document any tasks that would be activated
  by with'ing the specification and by using any part of the
  specification.
- Document which generic formal parameters are accessed from a task
  hidden inside the generic unit.
- Document any multithreaded components.

#### rationale

The effects of tasking become a major factor when reusable code enters
the domain of real-time systems. Even though tasks may be used for other
purposes, their effect on scheduling algorithms is still a concern and
must be clearly documented. With the task clearly documented, the
real-time programmer can then analyze performance, priorities, and so
forth to meet timing requirements, or, if necessary, he can modify or
even redesign the component.

Concurrent access to datastructures must be carefully planned to avoid
errors, especially for data structures that are not atomic (see Chapter
6 for details). If a generic unit accesses one of its generic formal
parameters (reads or writes the value of a generic formal object or
calls a generic formal subprogram that reads or writes data) from within
a task contained in the generic unit, then there is the possibility of
concurrent access for which the user may not have planned. In such a
case, the user should be warned by a comment in the generic
specification.

### Exceptions

#### guideline

- Propagate exceptions out of reusable parts. Handle exceptions within
  reusable parts only when you are certain that the handling is
  appropriate in all circumstances.
- Propagate exceptions raised by generic formal subprograms after
  performing any cleanup necessary to the correct operation of future
  invocations of the generic instantiation.
- Leave state variables in a valid state when raising an exception.
- Leave parameters unmodified when raising an exception.

#### example

```ada
------------------------------------------------------------------------
generic
   type Number is limited private;
   with procedure Get (Value :    out Number);
procedure Process_Numbers;

------------------------------------------------------------------------
procedure Process_Numbers is
   Local : Number;
   procedure Perform_Cleanup_Necessary_For_Process_Numbers is separate;
   ...
begin  -- Process_Numbers
   ...
   Catch_Exceptions_Generated_By_Get:
      begin
         Get (Local);
      exception
         when others =>
            Perform_Cleanup_Necessary_For_Process_Numbers;
            raise;
      end Catch_Exceptions_Generated_By_Get;
   ...
end Process_Numbers;
------------------------------------------------------------------------
```

#### rationale

On most occasions, an exception is raised because an undesired event
(such as floating-point overflow) has occurred. Such events often need
to be dealt with entirely differently with different uses of a
particular software part. It is very difficult to anticipate all the
ways that users of the part may wish to have the exceptions handled.
Passing the exception out of the part is the safest treatment.

In particular, when an exception is raised by a generic formal
subprogram, the generic unit is in no position to understand why or to
know what corrective action to take. Therefore, such exceptions should
always be propagated back to the caller of the generic instantiation.
However, the generic unit must first clean up after itself, restoring
its internal data structures to a correct state so that future calls may
be made to it after the caller has dealt with the current exception. For
this reason, all calls to generic formal subprograms should be within
the scope of a when others exception handler if the internal state is
modified, as shown in the example above.

When a reusable part is invoked, the user of the part should be able to
know exactly what operation (at the appropriate level of abstraction)
has been performed. For this to be possible, a reusable part must always
do all or none of its specified function; it must never do half.
Therefore, any reusable part that terminates early by raising or
propagating an exception should return to the caller with no effect on
the internal or external state. The easiest way to do this is to test
for all possible exceptional conditions before making any state changes
(modifying internal state variables, making calls to other reusable
parts to modify their states, updating files, etc.). When this is not
possible, it is best to restore all internal and external states to the
values that were current when the part was invoked before raising or
propagating the exception. Even when this is not possible, it is
important to document this potentially hazardous situation in the
comment header of the specification of the part.

A similar problem arises with parameters of mode out or in out when
exceptions are raised. The Ada language distinguishes between "by-copy"
and "by-reference" parameter passing. In some cases, "by-copy" is
required; in other cases, "by-reference" is required; and in the
remaining cases, either mechanism is allowed. The potential problem
arises in those cases where the language does not specify the parameter
passing mechanism to use. When an exception is raised, the copy-back
does not occur, but for an Ada compiler, which passes parameters by
reference (in those cases where a choice is allowed), the actual
parameter has already been updated. When parameters are passed by copy,
the update does not occur. To reduce ambiguity, increase portability,
and avoid situations where some but not all of the actual parameters are
updated when an exception is raised, it is best to treat values of out
and in out parameters like state variables, updating them only after it
is certain that no exception will be raised. See also Guideline 7.1.8.

#### notes

A reusable part could range from a low-level building block (e.g., data
structure, sorting algorithm, math function) to a large reusable
subsystem. The lower level the building block, the less likely that the
reusable part will know how to handle exceptions or produce meaningful
results. Thus, the low-level parts should propagate exceptions. A large
reusable subsystem, however, should be able to handle any anticipated
exceptions independently of the variations across which it is reused.
