---
title: 8. Reusability
sidebar_position: 8
---

Reusability is the extent to which code can be used in different
applications with minimal change. As code is reused in a new
application, that new application partially inherits the attributes of
that code. If the code is maintainable, the application is more
maintainable. If it is portable, then the application is more portable.
So this chapter's guidelines are most useful when all of the other
guidelines in this book are also applied. Several guidelines are
directed at the issue of maintainability. Maintainable code is easy to
change to meet new or changing requirements. Maintainability plays a
special role in reuse. When attempts are made to reuse code, it is often
necessary to change it to suit the new application. If the code cannot
be changed easily, it is less likely to be reused.

There are many issues involved in software reuse: whether to reuse
parts, how to store and retrieve reusable parts in a library, how to
certify parts, how to maximize the economic value of reuse, how to
provide incentives to engineers and entire companies to reuse parts
rather than reinvent them, and so on. This chapter ignores these
managerial, economic, and logistic issues to focus on the single
technical issue of how to write software parts in Ada to increase reuse
potential. The other issues are just as important but are outside of the
scope of this book.

One of the design goals of Ada was to facilitate the creation and use of
reusable parts to improve productivity. To this end, Ada provides
features to develop reusable parts and to adapt them once they are
available. Packages, visibility control, and separate compilation
support modularity and information hiding (see guidelines in Sections
4.1, 4.2, 5.3, and 5.7). This allows the separation of
application-specific parts of the code, maximizes the general purpose
parts suitable for reuse, and allows the isolation of design decisions
within modules, facilitating change. The Ada type system supports
localization of data definitions so that consistent changes are easy to
make. The Ada inheritance features support type extension so that data
definitions and interfaces may be customized for an application. Generic
units directly support the development of general purpose, adaptable
code that can be instantiated to perform specific functions. The Ada 95
improvements for object-oriented techniques and abstraction support all
of the above goals. Using these features carefully and in conformance to
the guidelines in this book, produces code that is more likely to be
reusable.

Reusable code is developed in many ways. Code may be scavenged from a
previous project. A reusable library of code may be developed from
scratch for a particularly well-understood domain, such as a math
library. Reusable code may be developed as an intentional byproduct of a
specific application. Reusable code may be developed a certain way
because a design method requires it. These guidelines are intended to
apply in all of these situations.

The experienced programmer recognizes that software reuse is much more a
requirements and design issue than a coding issue. The guidelines in
this section are intended to work within an overall method for
developing reusable code. This section will not deal with artifacts of
design, testing, etc. Some research into reuse issues related
specifically to the Ada language can be found in AIRMICS (1990), Edwards
(1990), and Wheeler (1992).

- Regardless of development method, experience indicates that reusable
  code has certain characteristics, and this chapter makes the
  following assumptions:
- Reusable parts must be understandable. A reusable part should be a
  model of clarity. The requirements for commenting reusable parts are
  even more stringent than those for parts specific to a particular
  application.
- Reusable parts must be of the highest possible quality. They must be
  correct, reliable, and robust. An error or weakness in a reusable
  part may have far-reaching consequences, and it is important that
  other programmers can have a high degree of confidence in any parts
  offered for reuse.
- Reusable parts must be adaptable. To maximize its reuse potential, a
  reusable part must be able to adapt to the needs of a wide variety
  of users.
- Reusable parts should be independent. It should be possible to reuse
  a single part without also adopting many other parts that are
  apparently unrelated.

In addition to these criteria, a reusable part must be easier to reuse
than to reinvent, must be efficient, and must be portable. If it takes
more effort to reuse a part than to create one from scratch or if the
reused part is simply not efficient enough, reuse does not occur as
readily. For guidelines on portability, see Chapter 7. This chapter
should not be read in isolation. In many respects, a well-written,
reusable component is simply an extreme example of a well-written
component. All of the guidelines in the previous chapters and in Chapter
9 apply to reusable components as well as components specific to a
single application. As experience increases with the 1995 revision to
the Ada standard, new guidelines may emerge while others may change. The
guidelines listed here apply specifically to reusable components.

Guidelines in this chapter are frequently worded "consider . . ."
because hard and fast rules cannot apply in all situations. The specific
choice you can make in a given situation involves design tradeoffs. The
rationale for these guidelines is intended to give you insight into some
of these tradeoffs.
