---
title: 10.2 Performance Measurement
---

While most well-known tools for measuring performance are stand-alone
programs that concentrate on execution speed, there is a comprehensive
tool that covers all four aspects of performance. The Ada Compiler
Evaluation System (ACES) is the result of merging two earlier products:
the United States Department of Defense's Ada Compiler Evaluation
Capability and the United Kingdom Ministry of Defence's Ada Evaluation
System. It offers a comprehensive set of nearly 2,000 performance tests
along with automated setup, test management, and analysis software. This
system reports (and statistically analyzes) compilation time, linking
time, execution time, and code size. The analysis tools make comparisons
among multiple compilation-execution systems and also provide
comparisons of the run-time performance of tests using different coding
styles to achieve similar purposes.

Performance Issues Working Group (PIWG) suite. The Quick-Look facility
is advertised as being easy to download, install, and execute in less
than a day, while providing information that is as useful as that
generated by the PIWG suite. In addition, sw-eng.falls-church.va.us,
directory /public/AdaIC/testing/aces. For World Wide Web access, use the
following uniform resource locator (URL):
<http://sw-eng.falls-church.va.us/AdaIC/testing/aces/>.

While measuring performance may seem to be a relatively straightforward
matter, there are significant issues that must be addressed by any
person or toolset planning to do such measurement. For detailed
information, see the following sources: ACES (1995a, 1995b, 1995c);
Clapp, Mudge, and Roy (1990); Goforth, Collard, and Marquardt (1990);
Knight (1990); Newport (1995); and Weidermann (1990).
