---
title: 10.5 Algorithms
---

### Mod and rem Operators

#### guideline

- Use incremental schemes instead of mod and rem when measured
  performance indicates.

#### example

```ada
   -- Using mod
   for I in 0 .. N loop
      Update (Arr (I mod Modulus));
   end loop;

   -- Avoiding mod
   J := 0;
   for I in 0 .. N loop
      Update (Arr (J));
      J := J + 1;
      if J = Modulus then
         J := 0;
      end if;
   end loop;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of using the mod and rem operators. One of the
above styles may be significantly more efficient than the other.

### Short-Circuit Operators

#### guideline

- Use the short-circuit control form when measured performance
  indicates.

#### example

```ada
   -- Nested "if"
   if Last >= Target_Length then
      if Buffer (1 .. Target_Length) = Target then
         ...
      end if;
   end if;

   -- "and then"
   if Last >= Target_Length and then Buffer (1 .. Target_Length) = Target then
      ...
   end if;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of using nested if statements versus using the `and then` or `or else` operator. One of the above may be significantly more
efficient than the other.

### Case Statement Versus elsif

#### guideline

- Use the case statement when measured performance indicates.

#### example

```ada
   subtype Small_Int is Integer range 1 .. 5;
   Switch : Small_Int;
   ...
   -- Case statement
   case Switch is
      when 1 => ...
      when 2 => ...
      when 3 => ...
      when 4 => ...
      when 5 => ...
   end case;

   -- "elsif construct"
   if Switch = 1 then
      ...
   elsif Switch = 2 then
      ...
   elsif Switch = 3 then
      ...
   elsif Switch = 4 then
      ...
   elsif Switch = 5 then
      ...
   end if;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of using case statements versus the elsif
construct. If the case statement is implemented using a small jump
table, then it may be significantly more efficient than the if .. then
.. elsif construct.

See also Guideline 8.4.6 for a discussion of the table-driven
programming alternative.

### Checking for Constraint Errors

#### guideline

- Use hard-coded constraint checking when measured performance
  indicates.

#### example

```ada
   subtype Small_Int is Positive range Lower .. Upper;
   Var : Small_Int;
   ...

   -- Using exception handler
   Double:
      begin
         Var := 2 * Var;
      exception
         when Constraint_Error =>
            ...
      end Double;

      -- Using hard-coded check
      if Var > Upper / 2 then
         ...
      else
         Var := 2 * Var;
      end if;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of using exception handlers to detect constraint
errors. If the exception handling mechanism is slow, then hard-coded
checking may be more efficient.

### Order of Array Processing

#### guideline

- Use column-first processing of two-dimensional arrays when measured
  performance indicates.

#### example

```ada
    type Table_Type is array (Row_Min .. Row_Max, Col_Min .. Col_Max) of ...
    Table : Table_Type;
    ...
    -- Row-order processing
    for Row in Row_Min .. Row_Max loop
       for Col in Col_Min .. Col_Max loop
          -- Process Table (Row, Col)
       end loop;
    end loop;
    -- Column-order processing
    for Col in Col_Min .. Col_Max loop
       for Row in Row_Min .. Row_Max loop
          -- Process Table (Row, Col)
       end loop;
    end loop;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of processing two-dimensional arrays in row-major
order versus column-major order. While most Ada compilers are likely to
use row-major order, it is not a requirement. In the presence of good
optimization, there may be no significant difference in the above
examples. Using static array bounds is also likely to be significant
here. See Guidelines 10.4.1 and 10.4.2.

### Assigning Alternatives

#### guideline

- Use overwriting for conditional assignment when measured performance
  indicates.

#### example

```ada
   -- Using "if .. else"
   if Condition then
      Var := One_Value;
   else
      Var := Other_Value;
   end if;
   -- Using overwriting
   Var := Other_Value;
   if Condition then
      Var := One_Value;
   end if;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of styles of assigning alternative values. The
examples illustrate two common methods of doing this; for many systems,
the performance difference is significant.

### Packed Boolean Array Shifts

#### guideline

- When measured performance indicates, perform packed Boolean array
  shift operations by using slice assignments rather than repeated
  bit-wise assignment.

#### example

```ada
   subtype Word_Range is Integer range 0 .. 15;
   type Flag_Word is array (Word_Range) of Boolean;
   pragma Pack (Flag_Word);
   Word : Flag_Word;
   ...

   -- Loop to shift by one bit
   for Index in 0 .. 14 loop
      Word (Index) := Word (Index + 1);
   end loop;
   Word (15) := False;

   -- Use slice assignment to shift by one bit
   Word (0 .. 14) := Word (1 .. 15);
   Word (15) := False;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of slice manipulation when shifting packed Boolean
arrays. For Ada 83 implementations using packed Boolean arrays, shift
operations may be much faster when slice assignments are used as opposed
to for loop moving one component at a time. For Ada 95 implementations,
consider using modular types instead (see Guideline 10.6.3).

### Subprogram Dispatching

#### guideline

- Use static subprogram dispatching when measured performance
  indicates.

#### example

The term "static dispatching" in this example refers to the use of
if/elsif sequences to explicitly determine which subprograms to call
based on certain conditions:

```ada
    -- (1) Dispatching where tag is not known at compile time
    --     (See ACES V2.0 test "a9_ob_class_wide_dynamic_01")
    -- Object_Type is a tagged type
    -- The_Pointer designates Object_Type'Class;
    -- Subclass1_Pointer designates Subclass1 (derived from Object_Type)
    -- Subclass2_Pointer designates Subclass2 (derived from Subclass1)
    -- Subclass3_Pointer designates Subclass3 (derived from Subclass2)
    Random_Value := Simple_Random; -- Call to a random number generator
    if Random_Value < 1.0/3.0 then
       The_Pointer := Subclass1_Pointer;
    elsif Random_Value > 2.0/3.0 then
       The_Pointer := Subclass2_Pointer;
    else
       The_Pointer := Subclass3_Pointer;
    end if;
    Process (The_Pointer.all);  -- Tag is unknown
    -- (2) Tag is determinable at compile time (static dispatching)
    --     (See ACES V2.0, test "a9_ob_class_wide_static_01")
    -- Object_Type is a tagged type
    -- The_Pointer designates Object_Type'Class;
    -- Subclass1_Pointer designates Subclass1 (derived from Object_Type)
    -- Subclass2_Pointer designates Subclass2 (derived from Subclass1)
    -- Subclass3_Pointer designates Subclass3 (derived from Subclass2)
    Random_Value := Simple_Random; -- Call to a random number generator
    if Random_Value < 1.0/3.0 then
       Process (Subclass1_Pointer.all);
    elsif Random_Value > 2.0/3.0 then
       Process (Subclass2_Pointer.all);
    else
       Process (Subclass3_Pointer.all);
    end if;
    -- (3) No tagged types are involved (no dispatching)
    --     (See ACES V2.0, test "ap_ob_class_wide_01")
    -- Object_type is a discriminated type with variants; possible
    -- discriminant values are Subclass1, Subclass2, and Subclass3
    -- All the pointers designate values of Object_Type
    -- Subclass1_Pointer := new Object_Type (Subclass1);
    -- Subclass2_Pointer := new Object_Type (Subclass2);
    -- Subclass3_Pointer := new Object_Type (Subclass3);
    -- There is only one "Process" procedure (operating on Object_Type)
    Random_Value := Simple_Random; -- Call to a random number generator
    if Random_Value < 1.0/3.0 then
       Process (Subclass1_Pointer.all);
    elsif Random_Value > 2.0/3.0 then
       Process (Subclass2_Pointer.all);
    else
       Process (Subclass3_Pointer.all);
    end if;
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of dynamic and static subprogram dispatching. The
compiler may generate much more efficient code for one form of
dispatching than the other.

#### notes

Dynamic dispatching will almost certainly be more efficient than an
explicit if . . . elsif sequence. However, you should be aware of any
optimizing decisions made by a compiler that might affect this
situation.
