---
title: 10.6 Types
---

### Aggregates for Type Extensions

#### guideline

- Use only simple aggregates when measured performance indicates.

#### example

```ada
   type Parent is tagged
      record
         C1 : Float;
         C2 : Float;
      end record;

   type Extension is new Parent with
      record
         C3 : Float;
         C4 : Float;
      end record;

   Parent_Var : Parent := (C1 => Float_Var1, C2 => Float_Var2);
   Exten_Var  : Extension;
   ...
   -- Simple aggregate
   -- (See ACES V2.0, test "a9_ob_simp_aggregate_02")
   Exten_Var := (C1 => Float_Var1, C2 => Float_Var2,
                 C3 => Float_Var3, C4 => Float_Var4);
   -- Extension aggregate
   -- (See ACES V2.0, test "a9_ob_ext_aggregate_02")
   Exten_Var := (Parent_Var with C3 => Float_Var3, C4 => Float_Var4);
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of using extension aggregates. There may be a
significant performance difference between evaluation of simple
aggregates and evaluation of extension aggregates.

### Protected Types

#### guideline

- For mutual exclusion, when measured performance indicates, use
  protected types as an alternative to tasking rendezvous.
- To implement an interrupt handler, when performance measurement
  indicates, use a protected procedure.

#### example

```ada
   -- (1) Using protected objects
   --     (See ACES V2.0, test "a9_pt_prot_access_02")
   protected Object is
      function Read return Float;
      procedure Write (Value : in Float);
   private
      Data : Float;
   end Object;
   protected body Object is
      function Read return Float is
      begin
         return Data;
      end Read;
      procedure Write (Value : in Float) is
      begin
         Data := Value;
      end Write;
   end Object;
   task type Modify is
   end Modify;
   type Mod_Bunch is array (1 .. 5) of Modify;
   task body Modify is
      ...
   begin -- Modify
      for I in 1 .. 200 loop
         The_Value := Object.Read;
         Object.Write (The_Value - 0.125);
         if The_Value < -1.0E7 then
            The_Value := 1.0;
         end if;
      end loop;
   end Modify;
   ...
   -- Block statement to be timed
   declare
      Contending_Tasks : array (1 .. 5) of Modify;
   begin
      null;  -- 5 tasks contend for access to protected data
   end;
   ------------------------------------------------------------------------------
   -- (2) Using monitor task
   --     (See ACES V2.0, test "tk_rz_entry_access_02")
   Task Object is
      entry Write (Value : in     Float);
      entry Read  (Value :    out Float);
   end Object;
   task body Object is
      Data : Float;
   begin -- Object
      loop
         select
            accept Write (Value : in     Float) do
               Data := Value;
            end Write;
         or
            accept Read  (Value :    out Float) do
               Value := Data;
            end Read;
         or
            terminate;
         end select;
      end loop;
   end Object;
   -- Task type Modify declared as above
   -- Block statement to be timed as above
```

#### rationale

Protected objects are meant to be much faster than tasks used for the
same purpose (see Guideline 6.1.1). Determine the impact of using
protected objects to provide access safely to encapsulated data in a
concurrent program.

### Bit Operations on Modular Types

#### guideline

- Use modular types rather than packed Boolean arrays when measured
  performance indicates.

#### example

```ada
   -- (1) Packed Boolean arrays
   --     (See ACES V2.0, test "dr_ba_bool_arrays_11")

   type Set is array (0 .. 15) of Boolean;
   pragma Pack (Set);

   S1     : Set;
   S2     : Set;
   Empty  : Set := (Set'Range => False);
   Result : Boolean;

   ...

   -- Is S1 a subset of S2?
   Result := ((S1 and not S2) = Empty);

   ---------------------------------------------------------------------

   -- (2) Modular types
   --     (See ACES V2.0, test "a9_ms_modular_oper_02")

   type Set is mod 16;

   S1     : Set;
   S2     : Set;
   Empty  : Set := 0;
   Result : Boolean;

   ...

   -- Is S1 a subset of S2?
   Result := ((S1 and not S2) = Empty);
```

#### rationale

Determine the impact of performing bit-wise operations on modular types.
The performance of these operations may be significantly different from
similar operations on packed Boolean arrays. See also Guideline 10.5.7.

### Bounded Strings

#### guideline

- Use the predefined bounded strings when predictable performance is
  an issue and measured performance indicates.

#### rationale

The unbounded strings may be allocated on the heap. If bounded strings
are not allocated on the heap, then they may provide better performance.
Determine the impact of using the string type declared in instantiations
of Ada.Strings.Bounded.Generic_Bounded_Length versus the type declared
in Ada.Strings.Unbounded.

The predefined Ada 95 language environment defines packages that support
both bounded and unbounded strings. Using bounded strings may avoid the
unpredictable duration of delays associated with using heap storage.

### String Handling Subprograms

#### guideline

- Use the procedural form of the string handling subprograms when
  measured performance indicates.

#### rationale

Determine the relative performance cost of functions and procedures
having the same name and functionality in Ada.Strings.Fixed,
Ada.Strings.Bounded, Ada.Strings.Unbounded and the corresponding child
packages whose names include Wide.

While functional notation typically leads to clearer code, it may cause
the compiler to generate additional copying operations.

### Constraint Checking

#### guideline

- Use strong typing with carefully selected constraints to reduce
  run-time constraint checking when measured performance indicates.

#### example

In this example, two potential constraint checks are eliminated. If the
function Get_Response returns String, then the initialization of the
variable Input would require constraint checking. If the variable Last
is type Positive, then the assignment inside the loop would require
constraint checking:

```ada
   ...
   subtype Name_Index is Positive range 1 .. 32;
   subtype Name       is String (Name_Index);
   ...
   function Get_Response return Name is separate;
   ...
begin
   ...
   Find_Last_Period:
      declare
         -- No Constraint Checking needed for initialization
         Input       : constant Name       := Get_Response;
         Last_Period :          Name_Index := 1;
      begin  -- Find_Last_Period
         for I in Input'Range loop
            if Input(I) = '.' then
               -- No Constraint Checking needed in  this `tight' loop
               Last_Period := I;
            end if;
         end loop;
         ...
      end Find_Last_Period;
```

#### rationale

Because run-time constraint checking is associated with slow
performance, it is not intuitive that the addition of constrained
subtypes could actually improve performance. However, the need for
constraint checking appears in many places regardless of the use of
constrained subtypes. Even assignments to variables that use the
predefined subtypes may need constraint checks. By consistently using
constrained subtypes, many of the unnecessary run-time checking can be
eliminated. Instead, the checking is usually moved to less frequently
executed code involved in system input. In the example, the function
Get_Response may need to check the length of a user-supplied string and
raise an exception.

Some compilers can do additional optimizations based on the information
provided by constrained subtypes. For example, although an unconstrained
array does not have a fixed size, it has a maximum size that can be
determined from the range of its index. Performance can be improved by
limiting this maximum size to a "reasonable" number. Refer to the
discussion on unconstrained arrays found in NASA (1992).

### Real-Time System Annex

#### guideline

- For cases where both rendezvous and protected types are inefficient,
  consider the use of the Real-Time Systems Annex (Ada Reference
  Manual 1995, Annex D).

#### rationale

The packages Ada.Synchronous_Task_Control and
Ada.Asynchronous_Task_Control have been defined to provide an
alternative to tasking and protected types for use in applications where
a minimal run-time is desired (Ada Reference Manual 1995, Annex D).
