---
title: 10. Improving Performance
sidebar_position: 10
---

In many ways, performance is at odds with maintainability and
portability. To achieve improved speed or memory usage, the most clear
algorithm sometimes gives way to confusing code. To exploit special
purpose hardware or operating system services, non-portable
implementation dependencies are introduced. When concerned about
performance, you must decide how well each algorithm meets its
performance and maintainability goals. Use the guidelines in this
chapter with care; they may be hazardous to your software.

The best way to build a system that satisfies its performance
requirements is through good design. You should not assume that speeding
up your code will result in a visible increase in system execution. In
most applications, the overall throughput of the system is not defined
by the execution speed of the code but by the interaction between
concurrent processes and the response time of the system peripherals.

Most of the guidelines in this chapter read "... when measured
performance indicates." "Indicates" means that you have determined that
the benefit in increased performance to your application in your
environment outweighs the negative side effects on understandability,
maintainability, and portability of the resulting code. Many of the
guideline examples show the alternatives that you will need to measure
in order to determine if the guideline is indicated.
